
Page-1
1063
January 1963

  

4 -3(a)(4

 

LBJ LIBRARY
Mandatory Review
Cas ie .

\e

  

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 10-63

Be  Concurred in by the:
Tee -UNITED STATES : INTELLIGENCE BOARD
. As indicated overleaf
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF
Director. for Intelligence, Joint Staff
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:
The Atori

    
  

4.3(2)(4)

4.3(0)(4)
Page-3
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 10-63

Bloc Economic and Military
Assistance Programs
Page-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM ....................,. foe beet e tee eee en es 1
SCOPE NOTE 0. eee coe ee tee eees 1
CONCLUSIONS 20.0. ec ee te eee eecece eee 1
DISCUSSION 1.60. cce cence eee . 4
I. COMMUNIST OBJECTIVES ©..0.0000.0 eee 4
Il. CHARACTERISTICS OF BLOC AID PROGRAMS ......... . 6
Il EFFECTIVENESS IN IMPLEMENTATION ................... 9
IV. IMPACT ON THE UNDERDEVELOPED COUNTRIES .......... 11
v. RAGTORS AFFECTING THE FUTURE COURSE OF THE PRO- 2

ANNEX A: Total Bloc Economic Aid to Underdeveloped Countries

ANNEX B: Estimated Value of Bloc Military Assistance to Non-Bloc
Countries

ANNEX C: Major Bloc Arms and Military Equipment, by Recipient
1955-1962
Page-5
BLOC ECONOMIC AND
MILITARY ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS

THE PROBLEM

To evaluate Bloc economic and military assistance to the under-
developed countries and to estimate future developments:

SCOPE NOTE

We do not consider in this estimate programs of assistance to
Communist countries. "We have accordingly: omitted’ the Bloc
Program of aid to Cuba. At its outset, this program was in some
respects of the same nature as those-for other ‘underdeveloped
countries outside'the Bloc. “With the establishment of a special
political relationship between Castro and the Bloc, however, aid
to Cuba’ soon took on much the same character as aid among
Bloc countries: In addition, we have conceritrated upon the
assistance programs of the USSR and the European Satellites,
and deal only briefly with aid extended by Communist China.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Bloc foreign aid programs in underdeveloped countries
over the past nine years have achieved the initial objectives of

* Bloc assistance to Cuba is discussed in: NIE-85-2-62, “Thé Situation and Pros-
pects in Cuba,” dated 1 August 1962; SNIE 85-3-62, “The Military Buildup in
Cuba,”"dated 19 September 1962;-and SNIB‘85-4-62, “Castro’s Subversive Capa-
bilities in Latin. America,”, dated 9 November 1962, : It will‘also be discussed in
NIE 85-63, “Possible Developments with Respect to Cuba,” scheduled for early
this year. . .

NOTE: The’Economic Intelligence Committee’provides regular factual report-
ing of significant developments in Bloc economic Telations with underdeveloped
countries. These are provided.in bi-weekly reports and semi-annual compilations
(The EIC-WGR-=1 series and the EIC-R14 series, respectively).

 

n= 1
Page-6
gaining entry to these countries, breaking the Western monopoly
of political influence, and greatly raising Bloc prestige. They
have established the image of the USSR as a great power which is
willing and able to come to the aid of the newly independent
countries and to provide an alternative to dependence on the
West. They have provided the Bloc with some opportunity to
exert influence over the policies of the recipients and have helped
to increase the general effectiveness of Soviet foreign policy.
(Paras. 1-21, 25-27)

B. The results of the programs, however, have in many cases
been less satisfactory than the Bloc probably expected. The Bloc
has not been able to displace or seriously weaken Western in-
fluence; most recipient countries have assumed the stance of
nonalignment, and they let their own national interests deter-
mine whether or not they support Bloc positions in foreign af-
fairs. Moreover, the leaders of these countries are strongly
nationalist, are little disposed to adopt Communist models, and
have frequently cracked down on local Communist parties.
(Paras. 21-22, 28-30)

C. Bloc economic aid extended to non-Communist countries
since 1954 has totaled about $4.5 billion, of which about one-
fourth has been drawn. The peak years to date were 1959-1961
in which extensions ranged between $870 and $960 million an-
nually. Extensions in 1962 were down to about $400 million,
There is usually a considerable lapse of time between extensions
and actual drawing. Drawings have increased annually, reach-
ing about $390 in 1962. Military aid during the same period is
estimated to be over $2.5 billion; deliveries usually follow promptly
after commitments and we believe some 90% of committed mili-
tary aid has been delivered. Deliveries were highest in 1962,
largely because of the massive shipments of military supplies to
Indonesia. (Paras. 9, 12, 18)

D. The Bloc almost certainly will continue substantial aid
programs over the next several years. Foreign assistance con-
stitutes a mark of great power status which the USSR would be
reluctant to give up, lest it Surrender an important field of con-
test to the “imperialist” adversary and lose an opportunity to
advance Soviet interests. It is Possible that, during the next

2 Ye
Page-7
several years, economic considerations will impel the Bloc to sub-
ject projected economic aid programs to closer scrutiny. Prob-
Jems of allocation of resources are likely to increase as deliveries
of heavy industrial equipment under existing commitments com-
pete with high priority internal programs. Our evidence is in-
sufficient to warrant a confident judgment as to whether the
sharp decrease in aid extended in 1962 resulted from a decision to
reduce the burden of aid, the adoption of a more selective ap-
proach, or reflected fewer opportunities for new agreements of
the kind which the Bloc wishes to enter into. However, we be-
lieve that the Soviets will not make a major cut-back in aid for
economic reasons; they will probably do so only if, for more gen-
eral reasons, they alter their overall policy towards undeveloped
countries. They will be watchful for opportunities in Africa and
Latin America and, we believe, will remain ready to make heavy
commitments to individual countries whenever particularly fa-
vorable opportunities arise. (Paras. 32-34)

E. We believe that the Soviets will continue to place great
stress on military aid, which has the advantage of being cheaper
and quicker to implement than economic aid and which involves
the recipient in a continuing dependence for spare parts, am-
munition, and technical aid. We expect them to add new types
of advanced weapons to, the list already available to recipients,
and to seek new customers for military assistance. The Soviets
in recent years have allowed their own personnel to man these
advanced weapons pending the availability of trained indigenous
Specialists, and we believe that they will do this in certain cases
even when this exposes their own personnel, albeit incognito, to
combat situations. It is also possible, although as yet we have
no evidence of this, that the Soviets will request client states to
grant them military support facilities or try to develop their
local military presence in a way which would assist them in
bringing military power to bear in crises at locations remote from
the USSR. We believe it unlikely, however, that the recipients
would wish to compromise their neutrality and expose themselves
to future military hazard by entering into such arrangements.
(Paras. 16-17, 35-36)
Page-8
DISCUSSION

|. COMMUNIST OBJECTIVES

1. According to Marxist doctrine, in the inexorable course of history
colonies are destined to throw off their fetters, to oust the colonial

Policy has shifted with changing circumstances, and various Com-
munist leaders have differed and continue to differ as to the correct

gles in China, Indo-China, the Philippines, Malaya, and Burma. At
the same time, the USSR paid little attention to the opportunities for
establishing influence with new governments by the more conventional
methods of international Politics.

3. However, apart from the case of China and, later to a lesser extent,
Indo-China, this approach was not successful and in the early fifties

overcome the USSR’s diplomatic isolation from these areas. More-
over, the Soviet economy had reached a level which permitted new forms
of competition with the West, while the development of anti-Commu-

danger of military conflict, Accordingly, more realistic policies were
developed by Stalin’s Successors, who came to realize that foreign aid
was an important instrument for the purpose of competing with the
West on a world scale,

4. According to the new line, the nationalist governments of emerg-
ing countries were to be accepted and acknowledged and the Commu-
nist countries were to establish diplomatic relations with them and offer
them trade and €conomic assistance, Simultaneously, local Communist
Parties were to be restrained from revolutionary activity that would

4 a
Page-9
‘a close association with the “socialist camp,” to bring these countries
eventually under Soviet control.

5. The Soviets believed that animosities against the former colonial
masters and the desire for rapid economic advance were so widespread
and deep in the underdeveloped countries that Communist aid would
accelerate developments in their favor throughout the area. They
soon established the idea that the USSR had arrived on the world
scene as a major supplier of investment and arms to which an under-
developed country, whether violently anti-Western or merely anxious
to balance Western ties with Eastern ones, could turn for assistance.
In actual practice, the programs have been determined both by the
advantages perceived by the Soviets in particular cases and by the
willingness of these countries to accept Bloc aid.

6. These programs have placed the Soviets in a Position to apply
some political pressure against the recipient governments. From time
to time they have pressed for support of Soviet foreign policy positions.
They have also urged these governments to allow the local Communist
parties to operate, to reduce economic ties with the West, and even to
imitate Soviet-type institutional forms in their internal administration.
Nonetheless, the Soviets generally have avoided making it a prerequisite
of assistance that recipient governments should make any specific politi-
cal moves favoring Communist causes. Nor have they actually cut off
aid programs to force compliance with political demands. Even at the
present time, when new efforts are being made to build local Communist
strength in the ex-colonial’ countries and “bourgeois nationalist” leaders
are coming in for occasional sharp criticism by Bloc spokesmen, as-
sistance programs are generally not exploited to try to work immediate
political changes in the receiving country.

7. Communist China has in recent years raised objections to the aid
programs of the Soviet Union. These objections have become part of
the general Sino-Soviet controversy, but were not a cause of that con-
troversy. Indeed, China has extended aid, though on a smaller scale,
on much the same basis and for much the same purposes as the USSR.
As the Sino-Soviet dispute deepened, however, the Chinese increasingly
saw Soviet aid as serving particular Soviet interests which did not coincide
with Chinese interests, e.g., assistance to India, They also resented the
size of Soviet aid to non-Bloc countries as compared to aid to China. Be-
cause other elements in the Communist movement have similar objec-
tions, China has found the Soviet program a useful target for ideological
attack, because it allegedly helps to consolidate the power of nationalist
regimes which are the enemies of local Communist parties and which
obstruct the eventual communization of the recipient countries.

i 5
Page-10
I. CHARACTERISTICS OF BLOC AID PROGRAMS

8. Since 1954, when the Soviets began their economic and military
aid programs, the Bloc has extended about $7 billion of credits and
other forms of aid to some 30 underdeveloped nations. Of this, about
71 percent has been extended by the Soviet Union itself, while the Euro-
pean Satellites and Communist China have provided 21 percent and 8
percent respectively. The aid has been used for a wide variety of pur-
poses, e.g., heavy industrial development, as in India, large projects
for power development, as in Egypt, and the development of trans-
portation facilities and light industry, as in Afghanistan and Guinea.
It has also included extensive technical assistance and the provision of
a wide range of armaments manufactured in the Bloc. Though the
scale of the programs is substantial, it is nevertheless small in compari-
son to comparable programs of the West. Furthermore, total Western
assistance to recipients of Bloc aid is greater than that extended by
the Bloc countries. The greatest Bloc efforts have been concentrated
in key countries, such as the UAR, India, and Indonesia, which are of
particular importance in their respective areas of the world.

9. Economie Aid. Bloc economic aid extended to non-Communist
countries has totaled about $4.5 billion, of which only about one-fourth
has been drawn.? Despite the large number of recipients, almost two-
thirds of this total has been allocated to four countries—India, the
UAR, Indonesia, and Afghanistan. In the first few years of the pro-
gram, the main effort was made in Asia and the Middle East. In recent
years, in response to opportunities in the newly-independent countries
in Africa, the program has been extended to that area through a number
of credits for small scale projects. In addition, the Bloc has for some
time tried to extend its Program into Latin America, and there have
been recent signs of greater receptivity in that area, particularly in
Brazil,

10. Apart from a few small grants, primarily from Communist China,
almost all economic aid extended by the Bloc countries has been in the
form of interest-bearing credits. Interest rates on Soviet loans are
seldom higher than 2.5 percent and are sometimes lower. Satellite rates,
however, are occasionally higher. Repayment: may ‘be made in in-
digenous commodities and is generally scheduled for a 12 year period.
The first payment often is not due until after the completion of sched-
uled projects. :

11, Though the Bloc countries advertise their credits as being “with-
out strings,” they do maintain some control over their programs. ‘No
advance conditions are demanded, and they leave to. the recipient coun-
tries the initiative for suggesting the uses for which aid is to be put.

 

*See Annex A.

6 | |
Page-11
However, few of the credits can be drawn upon before teams of Bloc
engineers and designers make surveys and draw up detailed plans for
specific projects. The credits are tied to these specific projects, for which
the equipment and materials must be purchased from the lending Bloc
country. Moreover, the credits are virtually all made for use in the
public sector, a practice by which the Soviets hope to strengthen tenden-
cies toward a socialist system.

12, These economic programs are slow,in implementation. Out of
about $4.5 billion assistance extended through 1962, drawings have
totaled only $1.25 billion. There is often a lag of several years between
the announcement of the credit and its actual use. The main reason
for this delay—not unique to Bloc foreign aid programs—is that con-
struction and installation cannot take place until each project is ap-
proved by both the lending and the recipient country and the necessary
technical surveys are completed. Accordingly, most drawings on credits
in the initial period are made for survey and design work.

13. To date slightly more than half of the economic credits have
been for industrial development, though only in India has the aid pro-
gram been concentrated almost exclusively in this field. Many of the
remaining credits have been used for major multipurpose projects (eg.,
the Aswan Dam, which will simultaneously serve purposes of reclama-
tion, irrigation, and hydroelectric power), for transportation facilities,
and for the development of mineral resources. Most Bloc credits to the
UAR, Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Indonesia, Guinea, Ceylon, and Ghana
are scheduled for such uses. Though these projects will be important
eventually for the development of industry in these countries, they are
oriented more at this stage toward resource development. Show projects
of little economic value account for only a small part of Bloc aid
programs.

14, Technical Assistance. Technical aid has constituted an important
part of the aid programs ever since their initiation. The Soviets have
hoped that technical aid would provide valuable opportunities for exert-
ing influence in these countries. In the last half of 1962, there were
9,500 Bloc nonmilitary technicians in 29 underdeveloped countries. Of
this total, 6,900 were Soviet, 2,200 were from the European Satellites,
and 400 were from Communist China. In addition, much effort has
been expended on training nationals from these countries in Bloc in-
stitutions. Special universities have been established for this purpose
in the USSR and Czechoslovakia, and by the end of 1962 some 17,000
students from the underdeveloped countries had received academic and
technical training in Bloc institutions.

15. The Soviets attach great importance to the establishment of
technical training institutes in the recipient countries. Such institu-
tions have been established in India and Burma and are either planned or

mz 7
Page-12
being organized in several countries in Africa. Bloc-built institutions in
Some cases are the only centers of technical training now planned for
these countries. Another important aspect of the technical aid effort
is on-the-job training in Bloc countries. Indian workers were trained
in the USSR during the construction of the Bhilai steel mill, and
Egyptian technical Personnel were trained in the USSR during the con-
struction of the nuclear research reactor provided by the Soviets.

intended to serve the same broad political objectives as assistance for
economic development. They offer an opportunity for quicker response,
however, and for exploiting or creating tensions between recipient coun-
tries and their neighbors, between recipient countries and the West, and
even among Western powers. Moreover, military aid is frequently well
suited to the task of associating the USSR with strong nationalist con-
cerns or ambitions, such as the Indonesians’ desires to acquire West
New Guinea.

17. The Soviets perceive in military aid certain Particular advan-
tages which economic assistance does not Provide. . They can serve
as sole supplier to an underdeveloped country which, because of hostile
relations with a pro-Western neighbor, cannot Procure elsewhere the
type and quantity of arms it desires. Even more than developmental
credits, arms assistance offers an opportunity to establish a continuing
dependence on the Bloc because of the recipient’s need. for training,
Spare parts, and technical support. Moreover, these Programs enable

18. We estimate commitments under Bloc military assistance agree-
ments with non-Bloc countries to date at about $2.5 billion,* of which
about 90 percent has already been delivered, Primarily to Indonesia,
Iraq, the UAR, and Syria. Deliveries were highest in 1962, largely
because of the massive shipments to Indonesia, At the end of 1962 there
were 3,300 military technicians in 11 underdeveloped countries, almost
all of them Soviet nationals. In the early years of the program, the
Bloc provided military assistance at very little cost to itself by de-
livering primarily obsolescent Weapons made available by its own

 

"See Annexes B and C. .

‘Equipment has been valued at average prices contained in contracts between
the Bloc and the recipient countties. In most cases the Tecipients are granted
discounts, frequently as much as 30 Percent, so that obligations incurred by the
recipients are, to that extent, less than contract values.

8 |
Page-13
modernization programs. Beginning in 1961, however, the USSR began
to provide advanced arms and weapon systems, such as MIG-21 jet
fighters, TU-16 medium jet bombers, and surface-to-air missiles, many
of which are still being phased in to Bloc forces and some of which have
been withheld from China. The USSR has not only provided training in
the use of advanced weapons but has apparently been willing in some
cases to man the weapon systems in crisis situations when trained
indigenous personnel were unavailable.

19. Bloc Capabilities. New extensions of economic aid to under-
developed countries have dropped sharply from the high point of 1960.
New commitments in that year totaled nearly $1 billion, fell slightly in
1961, and were less than half as large in 1962. This decline in part
reflects dwindling opportunities for new agreements of the kind which
the Bloc wishes to enter into. At the same time, however, drawings
under existing commitments have risen from year to year, reaching
about $400 million in 1962. At the present time, the USSR is having
difficulty in meeting its goals for domestic growth and the growing
needs of its Bloc partners for economic support. The Soviet leaders
have given occasional signs of impatience in the last two years about
the political results of the program and this has probably enhanced
concern over the demands of the aid program for items already in short
supply in the USSR.

20. Nevertheless, the aid Programs pursued thus far are well within
the economic capabilities of the USSR and the other Bloc countries.
Their cost is much less than that of major Soviet domestic undertakings
and represents annually only a fraction of one Percent of total Bloc
GNP. The bulk of military aid has come from existing surplus stocks.
The economic program impinges primarily upon the machinery indus-
tries of the Bloc, which are already hard pressed to meet investment
and military goals, but deliveries of capital equipment to date have
been small. .

Ill. EFFECTIVENESS IN IMPLEMENTATION

21. In pursuing their assistance programs, the Bloc countries possess
a number of advantages over the West. Their governments are able to
take major decisions quickly, without having to subject them to legisla-
tive debate, and they are able to negotiate aid credits with a minimum
of red tape. Throughout the underdeveloped world, US concern for
stability and orderly change, for the sensibilities of European allies, and
for the security of Western investment often inhibits US ability to adjust
policies to rapid changes. The Bloc is much less subject to such re-
straints and can give prompt support to radical or revolutionary move-
ments. It is able to move particularly quickly with military assistance.
not only in negotiation but also in implementation. In Iraa, the Soviets

oO
Page-14
exploited the aftermath of the revolt in 1958 by offering substantial
credits. In 1959 the Bloc took advantage of the break between France
and Guinea to develop close relations with the latter and to offer it aid.

22. Despite these advantages, the Soviets run into many of the same
problems experienced by Western countries. They have discovered no
magic shortcut or way to avoid the long process of technical surveys,
project approval, and general bureaucratic delay which is endemic to
economic aid programs. Their technicians turn out to have the normal
range of human frailties and. experience many of the same problems
of adjustment as do Western technicians in foreign lands. They some-
times make a negative impact on the local populace. Contrary to a
widely held impression, Proficiency in foreign language appears to be
the exception among Bloc technicians rather than the rule. Tech-
nicians from the USSR and Eastern Europe, moreover, are just as sus-
ceptible as those from the West to the rigors of tropical climates, and
often demand special living conditions for themselves.

23. Bloc aid programs are not immune to the negotiating delays
and lags in implementation which characterize Western assistance
efforts. While Bloc projects usually involve supervision of construction
and installation by Bloc technicians, much of the actual work is done
under the direction of the recipient country. To the extent that re-
sponsibility for administering a project is assigned to the recipient
country, the Bloc’s control is weakened and there often result delays
and errors for which the Bloc must share the blame. Many of the re-
cipient governments, moreover, have been unwilling or unable to allo-
cate sufficient domestic resources to development projects. In a number
of countries, such as Afghanistan, Guinea, and Indonesia, the USSR
has found it necessary to provide commodities for sale in the domestic
market in order to help raise the local currency portions of these
projects,

24, Major Soviet engineering projects, such as the Bhilai steel mill
in India, are usually of excellent quality. This does not always hold
true, however, of all Bloc projects or of many products of Bloc industry.
Thus the Egyptians appear to be dissatisfied with some of the heavy
machinery delivered by the Soviets in connection with the Aswan Dam
project. An automatic telephone installation in Baghdad is of a type
which Western countries have not installed in Several decades; it breaks
down frequently and rarely gives the subscriber the right number on
the first try. Soviet jeeps sent under the military assistance program
proved inadequate to the Indonesian roads and climate. In general,
recipient countries long familiar with Western products have often
been disappointed with the quality of Bloc equipment which has not
measured up to Western standards.

10 —
Page-15
1V. IMPACT ON THE UNDERDEVELOPED COUNTRIES

25. The economic and military assistance programs have unquestion-
ably brought important returns to the Bloc countries in terms of en-
hanced prestige. In particular, their willingness to undertake such
major projects as the Aswan High Dam has made a deep impression,
not only in the recipient countries, but more generally in the under-
developed areas. The general effect has been to raise Soviet and Bloc
prestige greatly since the inception of the programs, and to convince
the leaders and people of these countries that the USSR is willing and
able to contribute substantially to their development. This result far
outweighs minor complaints over specific aspects of the programs.

26. Many underdeveloped countries, e.g., India, Egypt, and Indonesia,
have come to count upon Bloc aid as an important part of their internal
economic development. In smaller countries in primitive stages of
economic development, such as the newly independent countries of
Africa, even relatively small amounts of aid have made an important
local impact. The programs have helped the USSR to establish posi-
tions from which it can exert influence over future developments. How-
ever, like the US, the USSR has found that such influence is limited.

27, Through the military aid program the Soviets now have established
important relationships with a number of military establishments in
these countries, Thus, Afghanistan’s armed forces are completely de-
pendent on the USSR for military equipmént and training. In some
cases, training of military specialists from the underdeveloped countries
may eventually bring some political influence with it. In addition, the
Soviets, by strengthening the armed forces of such countries as Egypt
and Indonesia, have disrupted the balance of forces in these areas and
have greatly stimulated tensions with neighboring countries. For
example, Bloc-equipped Egyptian forces are currently backing the revo-
lutionary government in Yemen, in opposition to indigenous forces sup-
ported by other Arab countries.

28. Despite these achievements, Bloc aid programs have in general
not succeeded in displacing or seriously weakening Western influence
in the recipient countries. It is true that the Programs have in many
instances encouraged nationalist leaders to be bolder and more assertive
against the West. For example, Bloc aid unquestionably stiffened
Sukarno’s posture against the Dutch. However, in a number of im-
portant instances, relations with the West were far worse when the
Soviets began their assistance programs than they are today. Bloc
military and economic aid has been unable to offset larger political
factors leading to improvements in Western relations with those under-
developed countries which at various times seemed to be potential Soviet
allies—e.g., Egypt in the aftermath of Suez, Iraq in the period after

| | "
Page-16
Qassim’s assumption of Power, and Guinea in the period immediately
following the French withdrawal.

29. Thus the programs have not succeeded in aligning the policies
of these countries with those of the Bloc, and indeed the leaders have
remained firm in their determination to be independent of either “Bloc”
and to accept aid from both sides. These leaders have remained alert
to any Bloc attempts to use aid Programs to undermine their inde-
pendence. Their inclinations toward neutrality have been strengthened
by the example of Nasser’s ability to bargain with both sides and to
play one off against the other. In fact, instead of tending toward align-
ment with the Bloc, these countries have been concerned more with
regional movements, such as pan-Arabism and pan-Africanism, and
closer relationships with other “nonaligned” countries.

30. Internally, the Programs have not produced conditions particularly
favorable to the eventual establishment of the Communist system. As
the Chinese have feared, Bloc assistance has frequently strengthened the
Position of the nationalist leaders of these countries, who in some cases
(India, Egypt, Iraq) suppress. local Communists. The programs have
not greatly increased local receptivity to the establishment of Soviet-
type institutions. Most of the present leaders in underdeveloped coun-

.tries in any case favor socialist economies, but these are generally
distinctly national brands which will enhance rather than compromise
their independence.

V. FACTORS AFFECTING THE FUTURE COURSE OF THE PROGRAM

31. We think it certain that the Bloc will continue its aid programs
over the next several years. In the first place, assistance to under-
developed countries has become a mark of great power status which the
USSR would be unwilling to sacrifice. Soviet leaders probably do not
believe that economic and military aid will quickly bring recipient
countries into close association with or membership in the Bloc. How-
ever, they have found their efforts effective in breaking down the West-
ern monopoly of influence and realize that their withdrawal would leave
the West unchallenged in this important field of competition. The So-
viets continue to expect, moreover, that the positions they win through
assistance, in conjunction with improvements in their power position
and favorable trends in world politics, will eventually produce develop-
ments in the underdeveloped countries confirming the Marxist prognosis
of Communist triumph on a world scale.

32. Aid policy will vary in accordance with the opportunities which
arise, the resources available, and the evolving Soviet attitude toward
the underdeveloped nations. With respect to opportunities, the Soviets
will probably be watchful in Africa, where the uncertainties of domestic
and regional politics and the prospective travails of southern Africa

12 |
Page-17
and the Portuguese colonies may turn up inviting Prospects. In Latin
America, they will hope to repair the setback suffered in the Cuban crisis
by acquiring a greater foothold on the continent. Offers of assistance
will be a part of this effort. In particular, the Soviets can be expected
to press their aid on Brazil which is a key country where they probably
See good opportunities. While the example of Cuba has underscored
Moscow’s readiness in Latin America as elsewhere to provide an alterna-
tive to dependence on the US, the Soviets have as yet made little progress
in Latin America as a whole.

33. It is possible that, during the next: several years, economic con-
siderations will impel the Bloc to re-examine its programs of economic
aid and to adjust their future Scope. Commitments already under-
taken will require a substantial increase in deliveries, particularly
of heavy industrial equipment. While such deliveries are not large
relative to total production, they compete with high priority internal
Programs which have already placed a strain on production capacity.
We think it likely that problems over allocation of resources in the
Bloc will increase over the next year or two as the Bloc countries strive
to meet ambitious commitments in domestic investment, higher living
standards, and expensive military and space programs. In these cir-
cumstances, foreign aid expenditures may come under more severe
scrutiny.

34. Nevertheless, we believe that any such re-examination would lead
to a major cutback in the Program only if the Soviets decided, on more

a shift in Soviet policy should occur, however, we think that the USSR
would still maintain a substantial aid Program and would remain ready

to make heavy expenditures in individual countries whenever particularly
favorable opportunities arose.

35. Cost considerations will be of less importance in determining fu-
ture levels of military aid, and we believe that the Bloc will continue to
Press arms assistance on a variety of potential customers, Moreover,
present trends suggest that the USSR will continue to expand the list
of advanced weapons available to non-Bloc customers as these countries
seek to.modernize their forces. To make these weapons operative, it
will probably be willing in some cases to provide Soviet personnel to
man them even when this requires that they be exposed, albeit without

a 13
Page-18
acknowledgement, to combat situations. We believe, however, that the
USSR will not transfer nuclear warheads or weapon systems designed
solely for use with such warheads.

36. In our military estimates of recent years, we have pointed to the
possibility that the USSR might try to develop forces particularly suited
for use in limited actions at a distance from the periphery of the Bloc.
In this connection, we have noted that such a policy would require
foreign bases or some regular provision for logistical support and main-
tenance. The local military disadvantage at which the USSR found
itself during the Cuban crisis may move the Soviets to serious efforts
in this direction. If so, the readiest opportunities for base or logistical
support rights would probably be found among those non-Bloc countries
which are recipients of Soviet military aid. We have no evidence, how-
ever, that the USSR has raised these matters with any of these countries,
and it is unlikely that their governments would wish to compromise their
neutrality and expose themselves to future military hazard by entering
into such arrangements.

14 Lt
Page-19
—_ TOTAL BLOC ECONOMIC AID
TO UNDERDEVELOPED COUNTRIES

961.3
—

In Millions of US Dollars ey av09

[7] Extended
| Drawn

480.8

152.2 4
“1128.0

 

 

 

 

 

ANNEX A

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

1961

407.2
“1392.9

   

1962

 

 

1956 1957 1958 1959 1960

36996 1-63

Musa
Page-20
200

6a0n0

 

ESTIMATED VALUE OF BLOC MILITARY ASSISTANCE
TO NON-BLOC COUNTRIES

(1955-1962)

EM commituenrs
HBB euiveries

100% 100%

85%

75% 75%

50%

  
  

130-35

  

12-25 23

1-2 ?
Morocco Algeria Guinea Mali Ghana

i

Syria Yemen Afghanistan

 

ANNEX B

 

India

Indonesia

Percent

100

60

40

Note 1. Equipment has been valued at average prices contained in contracts between the Bloc and the recipient countries. In

most cases the recipients ore granted discounts,
recipients are to that extent less than the figures shown above.

Note 2. The above estimates are based on fragmentary informati

 

frequently as much as 30 percent, so that obligations incurred by the

‘agreements are kept secret by both the Bloc and the recipients, whereas economic aid ‘agreements are made public,

ais 4.3(a)(4)

and are less firm than those for economic cid. Military aid
Page-21
ANNEX C
MAJOR BLOC ARMS AND MILITARY EQUIPMENT, BY RECIPIENT 1955-1962
. Unrrs
Ar
Teve or Eoururwr onax- UAR Inq Sema Yeutuy Iota 32°" Gevea Maa MO
ISTAN
Land Armaments
JS-2/3 heavy tanks. . 60 .
T-34/54 medium
tanks... 200 515 330* 385 60. wae 40
PT-76 amphibious
light tanks........ some 140
SU-76/100  self-pro-
pelled assault guns. . 12 200 120 80 60 see see
BIR-40/152 ar-
mored personnel
carrie! steeees 50 600 310 350 75 155 25 30
BTIR-50p/BRDM/
K-61 amphibious
carriers........... . 120 see see see 220 . o
Artillery: field, anti-
tank, antiaircraft,
truck-mounted re-
coilless...... 350 1,200 800 550 300 500 48 47 some
Infantry support:
antitank recoilless,
antiaircraft ma-
chine guns, mor-
tars....... beeeeee many many many many, some many some some .
Infantry weapons:
rifles, machine
SUNS... + Many many many many some ‘++ Many some — some.
Trucks and other ve~ .
hicles..... beeeeeee many many many many some many some some .
Naval Vessels
Sverdlov-class light
eruiser........... . . . . L . . oe
Skoryy-class destroy-
OTS. e sees eee wees 4 we . 8s aoe .
Riga-class escort, ee ee wee 8s
Submarines... . . 10 tee 12 ae
T-43 minesweepers. . 4 o 2 6 . :
Submarine chasers... 2 . . . 165 oe o
' P-4/6 motor torpedo
boats...... eee 27 12 15 wee ae 168 see . .
PGMG (Komar
Guided Missile
Boats)........... 3 o aes . . 12s tee os
Other: auxiliary ves-
sels and landing
craft....... sb eeeee 1 6 . 2 . 67 + .

See footnotes at end of table.
Page-22
MAJOR BLOC ARMS

AND MILITARY EQUIPMENT, BY RECIPIENT 1955-1962 (Continued)

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

   

Unis
AF Inpo- Mo-
Tyres or Equipment auan- UAR Iraq Syria Yemen Iypra yesta GUINEA Maur Rocco
ISTAN
Aircraft

TU-16 jet medium

bomber........... tee 20 10 26
IL-28 jet light

bomber. beeen 50 60 16 2 see 25
MIG-21 jet fighters... 45 16*' some some * 20
MIG-19 jet fighters. . o 40 16 20
MIG~-15/17 jet fight-

OTS. eee eee eee ee 126 128 43 48 83 It
AN-12 heavy trans-

ports......... rp) 3 208
Other: nonjet com

bat, trainers,

transports, helj

copters...... 7 160 526 18 ar 6O* 85 see tee 2

Guided Missiles

Air-to-Surface », see oe vee aes . 12
Surface-to-air +, oe s* 5* some * lds
Surface-to-surface

(ship-launched)¢, , , tee 3 ee . ee 28 see tee tee
Air-to-ai te eeeee as 45 164 some « some * 20 see
Surface-to-surface

antitank)!........ 5 0. Bie... wee nee ae wee eee

 

* Indicating an order, all or some of which has not yet been delivered.
» Indicating the number of TU-16 aircraft equipped with air-to-surface missiles, but not in addition to those listed

under aircraft.

° Indicating the number of surface-to-air battalions supplied.
«Indicating the number of Komar-class boats equipped with surface-to-surface missiles.

* Indicating the number of MIG-21 aircraft

aircraft,

equipped with air-to-air missiles, but not in addition to those listed under

‘ Indicating the number of launchers supplied.

NOTE: In addition to the deliveries listed, Algeria has received five helicopters,
and other vehicles, and many mortars and
recipient of some rifles, machine guns, mortars,

some personnel carriers, some trucks
machine guns as well as 48 pieces of field artillery. Ghana has also been the
armored personnel carriers and other equipment.
Page-23
: knowl basis. - Additional ‘essential dissenniaticir
~ following officials: within their respective departments: * |

Director of Intelligence and. Résearch, for the Department‘of State
rector, Defense Intelligence Agency, for: the Office-