
Page-1
NEB. cel ---|- ecnedr Ie.

Brazil: Prospects for a
Economic Reform and
Implications for Relations
With the United States

 

 

 

 

7
National Intelligence Estimate
This Estimate represents the views
of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the
US intelligence Community.
ith oy
«! we an
Sf, WSO
age
wo
st

ret

 

NE 93-90
August 1990

mr 610

A
Director af Sefet tre,
*, Central :
intelligence
Page-2
(hit)
(hit3)
Page-3
Director of Secry
Central
Intelligence

 

NIE 93-90

Brazil: Prospects for
Economic Reform and
Implications for Relations
With the United States,

Information available as of 8 August 1990 was used
in the preparation of this Estimate.

 

The following intelligence organizations parucipated
in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense Intelligence Agency

The Nationa! Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

The Office of Intelligence Support,
Department of the Treasury

The Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Intelligence, Department of Energy

also participating:

‘The Director of Naval Intelligence,
Department of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff. Intelligence,
Department of the Ar Force

This Estimate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board.

(REVERSE BLANK)
Si
bat 980

_
Page-4
Brazil: Prospects for

Economic Reform and
Implications for Relations
With the United States|

 

 

 

 

« We judge that President Collor and his team have a better-than-
even chance between now and mid-1991 of achieving their basic
goals of controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and
building momentum in implementing market-oriented structural
reforms. (SAVF)

* Collor should be able to preserve public confidence, relying on his
strong leadership, determination, and selfassurance_ |

* Collor will continue to seek closer bilateral relations, but problems
will persist in some key areas,
Page-5
Sec

 

Figure t
“Brazilian Inflation: Riding the Roller Center

Percent change over previous month

 

 

 

 

 

‘Unclassified 227525890
Page-6
Key Judgments

President Fernando Collor de Mello has undertaken the most ambitious
and extensive market-oriented reform program ever implemented in Brazil
in an attempt to stabilize and restructure the cconomy. Inheriting an
‘economy on the brink of hyperinflation, he has brought price increases
down to manageable levels and has launched measures to promote
efficiency, growth, and economic compctition, as well as to root out
corruption,

We judge that, despite formidable challenges, including the most recent
disruptions in oil supply from the Middle East, Collor and his team have a
better-than-even chance between now and mid-1991 of meeting the basic
stabilization objectives of the economic program and of building momen-
tum in implementing long-range structural reform. Specifically, he is likely
to hold inflation toa monthly average of about 10 percent as a first step
toward price stability. This will be accomplished by an cffective monetary
policy and a reduction of the fiscal deficit from 8 percent to 3 percent of
GDP—a respectable showing, although short of the 1.2-percent surplus
projected by the government. We expect a 3- to S-percent decline in GDP
in 1990, followed by a gradual upturn in production in 1991 that will be
accompanied by a slight increase in job creation, rising exports, and
monthly trade surpluses of about $750 million. Brazil will probably reach
an agreement with the IMF this year and move forward on negotiations
with other creditors. Negotiations with forcign commercial banks will be ‘

    

contentious, but an ironing out of differences is possible by mid-1991

Key interest groups, hurt by the austerity measures and reordering of the

economy, can be expected to raise the following challenges:

« Labor, facing layoffs and reduced real income, could become increasing-
ly disruptive.

© Cooperation of business will erode if Collor backslides on fiscal reform, a
key clement in bringing down inflation.

* A recalcitrant bureaucracy could hinder efficient implementation of
reforms.

« The Brazilian Congress will insist that it be a key player and may block
important aspects of the plan.

© Opponents will use the courts to challenge elements of the program.

* Several other sectors, including the military and the lower classes,
worrigd about their well-being, will press Collor for equitable treatment.
Page-7
Nonetheless, Collor’s political strengths outweigh his weaknesses. Through
his strong icadership, determination, and sclf-assurance, Collor will proba-
bly succeed in preserving the public’s confidence. Also in his favor are the
lack of a credible alternative to his pJan and the disorganization and

 

divisions among his detractors;

 

 

 

We believe there is a less-than-even chance that the program will
encounter difficultics serious cnough to provoke cither spiraling inflation or
a protracted downturn. In cither case, Collor would face a decline in public
confidence, encouraging his political opponents and weakening the resolve
of his congressional supporters. He would then grudgingly make conces-
sions and slow the pace of reform, allowing the economy to muddle
i losing his best chance to reverse Brazil’s economic fortunes.

Collor has made clear his goal of improving relations with the United
States and other Western nations as key to modernizing and putting Brazil
‘on the track to becoming a member of the First World, and he has
Jaunched several forcign policy initiatives to demonstrate his sincerity.
Focusing especially on trade, he has made impressive strides in opening
Brazil’s economy to market forces, while playing down excessive national-
ism and has strongly endorsed the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative.
He has been accommodating on sensitive bilateral issues, such as lowering
import restrictions and promising pharmaceutical patents, and demonstrat-
ed a pragmatic approach to environmental, narcotics, and arms transfer
issues. We judge that progress on Collor’s economic reform program and
some resumption of debt servicing will fgrm the basis for a restructuring of
Brazil’s $115 billion foreign debt.

 

 

 

 

‘While over the next 12 months we expect bilateral relations to continue to
improve, problems will persist in several arcas, such as technology transfer,
access to US markets, and nuclear safeguards. Brasilia will insist that
‘Washington respond to Collor’s economic reforms by allowing broader
access to US markets, particularly in the agricultural sector, and to high
technology, including assistance to Brazil's space launch vehicle program.
Itis also likely to continue differing to some extent with Washington on the
Uruguay Round of the GATT and the pace of liberalization of some
domestic sectors,-such as informatics. Even though Collor has signaled an
interest in waiving into force the Treaty of Tlatelolco—which forbids the
presence of nuclear weapons in Latin America—Brasilia will resist accept-

ing full-scope IAEA safeguards on its nuclear moran

Dida
Page-8
Sec:

Contents

 

Key Judgments.

Discussion 7 _ .
President Collor's Economic Program

| Challenges Facing Collor

Labor

Lower Classes

 

 

 

 

The Bureaucracy
The Military
The Catholic Church
Constitutional Challenges
On Balance 2
Prospects for the Economy Through Mid-1991
Inflation and Money Supply

 

 

    

 

 

 

Foreign Trade and Investment

 

Alternative Scenarios _

 

Foreign Debt
Privatization
Implications of Collor's Program for the United States
Trade and GATT.
Foreign Investment. = |.
Nuclear Safeguards and Proliferation
Arms Sales oe
Missiles and Space Launch Vehicles
Technology Transfer
Environment

 

 

 

Narcotics

vil
Page-9
Discussion'

 

President Collor’s Economic Program

When he took office in March 1990, Fernando Collor
ide Mello, the flamboyant, 40-year-old former gover-
Inor of Alagoas, set out to revolutionize the economy
\with an ambitious reform program designed to:

Halt near hyperinflation.

Dismantle entrenched and inefficient statist

 

Reorient the cconomy toward efficiency and growth
by creating a more competitive, market-oriented
environment.

Root out corruption.

\For Collor, Brazil's high inflation and economic ma!-
ise are duc almost entirely to mismanagement, which
ihas resulted in perennial public-sector budget deficits,
excessive government controls, the lack of foreign
ompetition, collusive private cartels, and antiquated
iechnology

 

 

 

 

His efforts to reform an economy in crisis and restore
faith in government will take years to complete.
though imbued with a sense of mission and strongly
Hetermined to achieve rapid gains, Collor began office
's a political outsider with an economic team lacking
in experience. While his record to date has gencrally
been positive, we believe he has barely scratched the
surface of the multiple problems he faces. Over the
ext 12 months or so—the time frame of this Esti-
mate—the Collor government probably will be able to
vercome only some of the formidable obstacles to
reform. We expect a pattern of bold initiatives cou-
led with periodic setbacks, out of which will emerge
sense that the Collor government is generating
jnomentum in overcoming Brazil's decp is
risis and its social and political mali |
This Estimate was initiated by the National Intelligence Officer
for Economics to assess the prospects for one of the most compre-
sensive and ambitious market-oriented reform nrograms ever

tempted in the largest and economically powerful new democracy
in South America. It covers the period between now and mid-1991.

t provides a focus for planning for Presi 's upcoming trip
Brazil during his South American vi

 

 

 

Collor’s program contains the most sweeping ¢co-
namic shock measures and structurat reforms ever
implemented in Brazil. To attack the root causes of
inflation and promote growth, the program has:

© Placed a temporary cap on prices and a leaky 18-10
30-month freeze on bank accounts and government
bond holdings that initially bottled up an cstimated
80 percent of liquid assets.

‘ Abolished most subsidy programs for industries and
specific exports. -

 

* Reduced the government from 23 to 12 mi
and abolished 24 federal agencies, while initially
promising personnel reductions of 20 to 25 percent
of the public-sector work force this year—which
could amount to roughly 360,000 employces,

© Imposed a one-time capital gains tax on financial
assets, taxes on financial transactions, and higher
taxes on agricultural profits.

© Initiated aggressive enforcement of tax laws and
made the head of the federal police responsible for
‘tax collection in an anticorruption move.

 

* Established a new currency and freed the exchange
tate, although some contro!s on foreign exchange
dealings stayed in place.

* Raised fucl prices and utility charges, proclaiming
that Brazilians would have to pay the real cost for
government goods and services.

» Established guidelines for privatizing all but a few
key parastatal firms—some 180 federal firms pro-
ducing about 10 percent of GDP will be affected.

* Eliminated most nontariff barriers, to be replaced
with tariffs that will gradually be reduced.

we
Page-10
- . mn

 

(hi3)
Page-11
* Promised to reduce impediments to foreign
investment.

* Largely deindexed the economy by breaking the
automatic linkage between wage and price in-
creases!

 

 

 

 

The impact of the shock measures—plunging inflation
and production—has begun to wear off, and Collor is
having difficulty controlling wage demands. Most
firms were able to gain access to their frozen accounts
during the first several weeks of the program through
special provisions and loopholes. Although the in-
creased liquidity helped rekindle output, prices—

ai a seasonal influences—also began to climb.

 

Relying on a small circle of trusted advisers, Collor
has used a highly centralized and interventionist
approach to regulate and implement the plan. In the
first few months, this approach was accompanied by
hasty decisions, several policy flip-flops, retractions,
and delays—often attributed to the inexperience of
key economic team Icaders—that at times confused
business and labor, played into the hands of congres-
sional opponents, and reduced public confidence in the
plan. Particularly embarrassing to the government
was the ease with which many firms quickly gained
access to most of their frozen accounts soon after the
program was announced. Despite these failings, we
believe Collor has suffered little lasting damage,
although he may reshuffle the Cabinet after the
‘October election:

 

 

Political Challenges Facing Color

Collor’s quick and unequivocal commitment to over-
come Brazil's severe economic problems, address so-
cial inequities, and fight corruption helped him to win
carly support for his program. As the first popularly
elected president in 30 years, he benefited from a high
degree of popularity and legitimacy in launching the
first phase of his economic plan|

However, popular support for both Collor and his
program has declined significantly from the euphoria
of the first weeks in office and his political skills will
be tested severely, Opposition political parties, labor
unions, and business groups, which initially were

 

stunned and subdued by the sheer magnitude and
boldness of Collor's reforms, have begun to react and
are searching for ways to dilute the program's tough-

est measures{ |

Collor had relatively few problems warding off initial
congressional attempts to obstruct the plan, but the
legislature began to assert itself by May—in large
part assisted by missteps by Collor and his team. In
that month, Congress reversed a presidential decree
limiting the powers of regional labor courts to grant
cost-of-living wage increases. When the Supreme
Court blocked Collor’s effort to circumvent Congress
by issuing a nearly identical decree, he suffered his
first major political sctback.

4
In his dealings with the Congress from now until carly
1991, when the new Icgislature is seated, Collor will
focus on forestalling any new effort by the majority
‘opposition parties to undermine his program. He will
seck to prevent the formation of an opposition blac
that could out vote his own center-right allies, using
Icgislative mancuvers to keep opponents off balance.
After the election in October, Collor should have an
casy time oulmancuvering the lameduck congress and
in putting off consideration of key measures until
after the new body is installed, We expect the new
congress to be fragmented but with a strong moderate
base that will permit Collor to construct a working,
albeit shifting, coalition of suppor{ |

Callor also will have to overcome opposition or uneasi-
ness over his program by key interest groups. (C

 

 

 

 

Labor. Onc of the most difficult tasks Collor faces is
to keep labor from rebelling against his economic
reform program. Much of organized labor—about 20
percent of Brazil's work force—initially acknowl-
edged the need for economic reform but is increasing-
ly worried about recession, privatizations, and private-
and public-sector layoffs. The most forceful effort to
challenge Collor's labor policies has come from the
Sole Workers Central (CUT), the more radical of the
‘two main labor groups, which is promoting repeated
strike actions and hopes eventually to stage a pro-
longed national strike, The CUT also is protesting
Page-12
tt
(hits)
Page-13
(hit)

reductions ordered by Collor in the public-sector work [hit3)
force—one of the CUT's strongest enclaves—and is

trying to make Collor’s labor policies a central issue of

the election campaign]

As workers confront the reality of still high monthly:
inflation rates, continuing recession, and Collor’s
firmness against returning to full wage indexation,
strike activity is likely to pick up. at least for the
remainder of 1990, and become more disruptive. To
defuse labor protests in the private sector this year,
Brasilia is delaying until August 1991 the introduc-
tion of free collective bargaining. Meanwhile, the
government is permitting full inflation compensation
for the lowest wage earners.

The government is counting heavily on the prospect
that, once the economy moves upward, firms will
begin to rehire workers, lessening labor militancy.
Public-sector employces will pose a special problem as
long as planned federal work force cuts are pursued,
Collor may be forced to stretch out dismissals until
well into 1991,

Lower Classes. Collor probably will avoid trying to
launch ambitious welfare programs broadly promised
during his campaign until the economy is more robust
and the budget picture improves. He already has
announced small-scale, low-cost, but well-publicized,
programs to demonstrate his seriousness to the lower
classes. We believe that such measures, coupled with
the success of the stabilization program, will keep the
Poor quiescent in the short run as long as Collor
moves toward financing a more comprehensive social
program.

Business. By definition, Collor’s structural reforms
threaten a significant portion of organized business,
which has been dominated by inward-looking, protec-
tionist-inclined sectors. But reforms also offer great
‘opportunity to many other industrial and agricultural
sectors capable of competing internationally. If re-
form succeeds, the latter sectors will gain ascendency
ind provide Collor with one of his principal constitu-
‘encies,|
Page-14
‘The shock measures contained in the economic pro-
gram Were initially a source of friction with the
‘business community, but with most businesses having
regained access to their blocked funds, concern has
turned to Collor’s implementation of the program's
broader goals. In general, business is urging Collor to
cut public expenditures faster and pursue fiscal re-
form in order to reduce inflationary pressures. If
inflation is stabilized at current levels (10 to 12
Percent monthly) or declining and the cconomy shows
signs of resumed growth, we believe the business
community is likely to maintain its general support
for the reform effort. At the same time, however, it is
important that Callor continue sceking feedback from
the business community and show some flexibitity in
the pace of liberalization to avoid severe damage to
industry

 

The Bureaucracy. Opposition to Collor from the gov-
‘ernment burcaucracy stems from those who imple-
mented prior administrations’ interventionist policies
and employees whose jobs Collor has promised to.
climinate, However, widespread public perception
that the bureaucracy is ineffectual, overstaffed, and
‘corrupt is obviously in Collor’s favor. While he may
continue to meet legal challenges to his efforts to cut
unnecessary government employment, he is not likely
to mect widespread popular opposition.

 

The Military. To date, Collor has succeeded in
asserting command over the armed forces and reduc-
ing their political influence without major challenges.
Despite minor irritants, Collor appears to have won
the respect of senior officers because of his assertive,
no-nonsense leadership and visionary determination to
build a better, more competitive Brazil. Long one of
the most vociferous proponents of statist policies, the
military establishment has accepted Collor's call for
privatization of most state-owned enterprises because
the gencrals sce no effective alternative. Collor has
been careful not to demean the military as an institu-
tion. He probably will continue to cultivate a solid
relationship with the high command to offset any
potential carping from the generals that the armed
forces are being singled out for budget cuts or being
ignored.

 

 

The Catholic Church, Collor also is concerned about
the influence that the progressive wing of the Catholic
Church exerts on lower-class attitudes. Many progres-
sive clergy openly urged their flock to support his
presidential opponent. Consequently, Collor probably
will try to influence the church's conservative hicrar-
chy to support his economic policies and to have them
counter any efforts by the progressives against his
government

 

 

 

 

Constitutional Challenges. Scrious questions already
are being raised about the constitutionality of several
aspects of Collor's economic plan. The 1988 Constitu-
tion imposes significant restraints on executive power,
making the courts a probable continuing battleground
for a president with authoritarian tendencies. His
orders to fire large numbers of public-sector employ-
ces have spurred challenges on the basis of job
security guaranteed under the 1988 Constitution to
tenured civil servants. Other court challenges have
occurred against Collor’s attempts to deindex wages
and limit wage increases. Persistent negative rulings
by the courts could undermine the administration's
plan to break the cycle of inflation, if the government
cannot find a legal way to circumvent adverse deci-
sions. We believe that the President's dogged determi
nation to overcome obstacles will enable him to keep
the legal challenges from derailing key components of

his e program during the period of this Esti-
mate

On Balance. Collor’s political strengths outweigh his
liabilities as he attempts to implement his multifacet-
ed reform program. He is in tune with public senti-
ment in offering Brazilians a new vision and hope for
the future, and many see him as possessing the
leadership qualities tequired to meet the challenge of
restructuring Brazil's economy and restoring credibil-
ity to the government. Working in Collor’s favor is
likely to be the diffused nature of criticism from
special interests, which has focused on specific parts
of the plan rather than rejecting it entirely. In our
view, Collor’s task will be to prevent these politically
disparate groups from mounting a sustained campaign
to block his reform measures on an issue-by-issuc
Page-15
basis. On balance, we believe Collor's determination
and self-assurance—along with the technical compe-
‘tence and growing experience of his team as well as
the lack of a credible alternative to his plan—will
succeed in preserving the public's confidence and
offsetting his detractors.

Prospects for the Economy Through Mid-1991

‘We judge that the Collor team has a better-than-cven
chance between now and mid-1991 not only of mect-
jing the basic stabilization objectives of the economic
program but also of generating a sense that the
government is building momentum in implementing
its long-range structural reform goals. In the process,
we also believe that the government will continue to
be widely seen as putting Brazil back on the path to
sound economic growth and effective cconomic man-
agement,

  

 

 

 

 

 

‘We base this judgment of relative success on the
following projections: Collor is likely to hold inflation
down to manageable levels—at a monthly average of
about 10 percent—through effective management of
the money supply and a reduction of the fiscal deficit.
We also expect some improvement in other key
economic indicators, including a gradual upturn from
the current recession accompanied by a slight increase
in job creation, and a trade surplus at about $750 mil-
lion monthly, based on oil prices of roughly $30 per
barrel. Although the shock program will cause a
contraction of GDP in 1990, we believe that the
sharpest decline has already occurred and that output
is poised today to rebound,

 

 

 

 

We estimate that the Brazilian economy can adjust to
the embargo of Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil supplies without
substantial damage to Collor’s economic reform pra-
gram. Brazil is 80 percent energy self-sufficient, and
the economy is largely self-contained. Exports are
diversified and constitute about 10 percent of GDP. A
prolonged crisis in the Middle East and continued
dramatic rise in oil prices, however, would have a
major inflationary and recessionary impact on Bra-
zil’s economy.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Anflation and the Money Supply. \n a major step to
avoid monetization of the budget deficit, the Central
Bank announced in May it will no longer purchase

 

 

aogh

 

Brezil: GDF Trends

Percent change iver prevons year

 

* Projected range.

 

C14 1

government securities that the market will not buy.
The bank is attempting to use orthodox tools to
manage the money supply—adjusting reserve ratios,
utilizing open-market operations, and buying and
selling foreign exchange—but both the bank and the
players in the market are still learning. We expect
inflation to drop below 12 percent in August and
September because of tight controls on monetary
growth, Thereafter, Callor's task becomes more com-
plex as he decides how to accommodate higher oil
import costs. We believe that he will allow the state
company only gradually to pass through the costs

in higher prices and will relax monetary policy only
slightly to add liquidity to the anion]

  

oy

[a
Page-16
Figure 3
Brazik: Capacity Udixation la Ledestry®

 

a as Oe a
yMAMS J ASONDIFMAMI

Soar
sy 190
Sau Paulo industics only.
Unclassified ane

The government is using supplementary measures to
help hold down prices and inflationary expectations.
In late June, it introduced a wage policy designed to
provide workers with partial shelter from inflation,
without the full reindexation advocated by Congress.
The Collor team correctly argues that indexation
would put strong pressure on prices. In addition, the
government requires firms to present cost data to
justify any price increases, excluding increased labor
vosts. Collor also has shown a willingness to put
‘external pressure on price increases by lowering tar-
iffs on goods that have shown the greatest price
increases. Finally, the recession itself has kept down-
ward pressure on prices

 

The Fiscal Deficit. We bclicve that the government
will be able to meet only about half its planned cut in
its budget deficit in 1990 but that this achievement
would be a solid showing and cnough to keep infla-
tionary pressures in check. We foresee the deficit
falling from the 8 percent of GDP prevailing when
Collor took office to a 3-percent deficit by yearend?
The government itself is more optimistic. In May. it
projected a surplus equivalent to 2 percent of GDP. It
has since backpedaled its projection toa still healthy
1.2-percent budget surplus. We believe that this pro-
jection is too optimistic because spending will not be
cut as much as expected and the large increase in
revenue reported through mid-1990 will not continue.
Specifically, the government's projection docs not
take full account of setbacks in the schedule for
privatization, difficulties in curting subsidies quickly,
and increases in debt service payments as inflation
exceeds the promised zero percent. Moreover, reces-
sion will hold down revenues and use of the blocked
accounts to pay taxes cannot be repeated.

 

 

 

 

Progress in reining in the deficit will again be difficuit
in 1991, largely because at least half the revenue
gains this year have a one-time impact. Additional
sources of revenuc should become available, however,
assuming that the privatization process is in full swing
in 1991, economic growth picks up, and cost-saving
cuts in the federal work force continue. In addition,
officials have said that the government will adopt new
tax measures if necessary. If the government contin-
ues to pay strict attention to cutting expenses and
enhancing revenues, it can sustain the improvement
foreseen for 1990 and perhaps better it next year.

Gross Domestic Product. The GDP decline for the
year should be 3 to 5 percent, and the economy will
probably achicve a small positive growth in 1991.

' We believe half the reduction in the deficit will come from
reduced service costs on the domestic debt—one percentage point
savings each will come from the elimination of subsidies and the

streamlining of parastatal companics—and only a O.S-percent
teduction wil come from the delayed privatization monn)
Page-17
Figure 4 Figure 5
Interest Rate on Government Securities Brazil: Foreign Trade Trends
Percent retum pr mamith Bilton US$
» 4
° we oe
« * Aap,
° “\/
I TT
OPP MAMI FS ASONDIFMAMS Y TFMAMI JASONDJEMAMI
1989 1990 19 10
Unclassified 21850 Unclassified —

With the bulk of funds initially frozen now circulating
again and wage increases being granted, a gradual
rebound in production is likely. In addition, we expect.
the Central Bank to continue to allow the exchange
rate to depreciate in order to stimulate exports,
Coupled with Collor's continued, confirmed commit-
ment to his plan, such recovery should give the
business community enough confidence to increase
capital investments in 1991—possibly including the
return of some flight capital. Even though in the short
term the recovery is not expected to be robust, it could
form the basis for faster growth in ss92f |

 

Foreign Trade and Investment. The hike in oil prices
caused by the crisis in the Middle East will raise
import costs and dampen export sales. In the face of

lasting oil shortages, Brazil can increase domestic oil.
Production 10,000 to 20,000 barrels per day and
reemphasize its fuel alcohol program, although it will
take several months to revitalize. If current oil market
conditions persist, with oil prices at about $30 per
barrel, monthly trade surpluses will probably dip to
about $750 million during the remainder of 1990
after averaging about $1 billion carlier in the year.
Nonetheless, with improvements in the quality of
Brazil's manufactures, currency devaluations, and the
shift of goods into the export market until the econo-
my picks up, cxports arc likely to grow, eventually

ret ling the surplus. By mid-1991, if economic

indicators confirm our assessment, the climate for
forcign invesiment should improve. r |
Page-18
Figure 6
Brazil: international Reserves
Aileon US$
=
¥

3 wt 8 8B. 08
“end of Apnl 19a,
Unclassified a

Foreign Debt. The Collor team believes that achieving
an agreement with foreign creditors is essential to
‘overcome the international financial community's
growing resentment of Brazil resulting from the de
facto moratorium on debt service payments on both
commercial and official loans begun under the Sarney
administration. Although we expect an International
Monetary Fund (IMF) program to be in place this
year, with Brazil drawin, least $500 million by
mid-1991, an agreement will be contingent upon
progress in talks with commercial banks. Brazil began
token payments to bilateral creditors in July, and we
‘expect a Paris Club agreement to follow the IMF
agreement, Talks with commercial lenders will be
more difficult and confrontational. Brazil will insist
on debt relicf at Ieast as favorable as the Mexico

 

package. Nevertheless, Brazil's $67 billion foreign
commercial debt forms a significant share of bank
Toan portfolios and banks still sec future opportunities
in Brazil. We belicve an ironing aut of differences is
possible by mid-1991. Brazil will probably still be a
Net repayer to the Inter-American Development Bank

(IDB) and the World Bank because of B:
repayment commitments and lags in re
‘bursements from new loan programs.|

il's large
1g dis-

 

 

Privatization, Privatization is getting off to a slow
start but the machinery is in place, The government
scaled back the number of firms to be sold in 1990
from 12 to 4, and we believe sales from these firms
will yield no more than $2 billion. Many of the firms
chosen for the first series of sales are profitable, and
major layoffs are not likely to occur. Foreign creditors
will be allowed to participate in the program and
obtain up to 40 percent of the voting shares, but debt-
equity swaps will probably be delayed until 1991
because the Central Bank fears an inflationary im-
pact.

Alternative Scenarios

In administering @ complex set of fiscal and monctary
controls, Collor’s team is walking a’fine line between
controlling inflation and producing a debilitating re-
cession. While most Brazilians support the need for
reform, all groups are paying a price. Their willing-
ness to continue paying that price will be determined
by their confidence in the future and their perception
of equitable burdensharing during the period of aus-
terity|

 

 

 

 

‘We estimate that, in the face of spiraling inflation or
a protracted downturn, Collor will try to maintain the
basic clements of his program. These scenarios—
which we give a somewhat less-than-even chance of
‘occurting—could develop if:

Budget targets were not achicved because constitu-
tional challenges successfully blocked efforts to
reduce public-sector employment and privatize par-
astatal enterprises; tax revenues fell far short of
‘expectations because of the slack economy, and

10

_
Page-19
Figure 7
Brazil: Foreign Debt, 1980-89
Milton US 8
1s
Short Term
‘Oiber”
fev Ollicial
<) PRA
-Commerstal
Medium and Long Term”
Er)
owe a we 3 a 8s 8 ci 3 sy

* includes arrean (see below),
 tcludes bonds, suppliers credits, and intetcumpany loans.

 

Unclassified mimes

* Collor decided to monetize the resulting deficit; or _If this scenario takes place, the President probably:
would grudgingly decide to make concessions, slowing
+ Huge wage cuncessions obtained cither through implementation of his reforms and hampering control
court decisions or congressional action to reindex of the budget. Collor might reimpose wage and price
Wages or a major surge in farm prices because of |_ controls as a temporary measure but continue to
badly slumping production, produced a resurgence strongly resist a full return to teindexation—arguing
of near-hyperinflation, and this would signal a return to the Sarney years. He
would probably attcmpt to regain momentum by
* Continued tight monetary policy produced deepen- announcing major Cabinet changes and renew efforts
ing recession and rising unemployment. to implement his program. However, Collor would
probably have to bring in outside economic experts of
If confidence in Collor falters badly, the chances of an stature, surrendering some of his authority. Under
obstructionist Congress increase. Even ifthe newly these circumstances, he still might be able to make
clected body initially supports Collor, a subsequent less ambitious adjustments to the economy but would,
decline in public confidence would embolden political nevertheless, have lost his best chance of reversing
‘opponents and weaken the resolve of the President's Brazil's economic fortunes.
‘congressional supporters

a
Page-20
Implications of Collor’s Program for the United States
The success of Collor's reforms is important to the
United States. His presidency represents the consoli-
dation of democracy in Latin America’s largest and
‘economically most powerful country. Moreover, he
has succeeded in a matter of months in revitalizing
the population's faith in Brazil's future, with his
promisc to put the country back on the path to
“grandeza" and modernization. He joins a growing
list of Latin American leaders espousing major mar-
ket-oriented economic reform as the only way to
Promote sustained economic development and growth,
and his program compares favorably with market-
oriented reforms undertaken elsewhere in the region.

But Collor has made it clear that his goal of improv-
ing Brazil's relations with the United States and other
developed countries is not an end in itself, rather a key
component of his overarching objective of moderniz-
ing the country and carving out a place for Brazil as
an influential actor in the First World. Collor realizes
that Brazil has become increasingly isolated economi-
cally and noncompetitive technologically, especially in
relation to the growing economic integration taking
place in East Asia and Europe!

With such goals in mind, Collor has launched several
‘foreign policy initiatives to demonstrate his sincerity.
Focusing especially on trade, he has made impressive
strides to open Brazil's economy to free market forces
and has played down excessive nationalism. Collor has

enthusiastically endorsed Presi jush’s Enterprise
for the Americas Lnitiati

Collor realized that, to break the logjam in US-
Brazilian relations, he had to aggressively pursue
Tapproachement with the United States by showing
ficxibility on some sensitive bilateral issues, He has
lowered import restrictions, promised pharmaceutical
patents, and demonstrated a pragmatic approach to
environmental, nuclear proliferation, and arms trans-
fer issues. Moreover, he and his team have developed
good personal rapport with their Washington counter-
atts.

so

Over the nea. 12 months, we expect bilateral relations
to improve. Although the overall record

 
  

jive, talks on some issues—particularly
ration and transfer of advanced tech-
nology—will continue to be difficult. Brasilia will
insist that Washington respond to Collor's economic
and fiscal reforms by allowing increased technology
transfer and broader access to US markets]

Trade and GATT. Collor maved quickly to reorient
Brazil's highly protectionist trade regime away from
nontariff barriers to a tariff system, removing the
main roadblocks to improved bilateral relations. This
positive start, however, will be tempered by Brazil's
need to sustain trade surpluses necessary to bolster
international reserves and service its forcign debt
obligations. Brasilia may also come under heavy
pressure by some domestic interest groups claiming
that too rapid liberalization would undermine less
competitive domestic firms.

However, Brazilian complaints against US agricultur-
al policies remain key topics on the new administra
tion’s bilateral trade agenda. Brasilia claims that the
US Export Enhancement Program (EEP) for soybeans
is undercutting their exports to traditional markets
and may take the issue to the GATT unless the
United States discontinues this subsidy. Brazil also
will probably press harder for increases in US quotas
‘on imports of various agriculture products, especially
orange juice and processed meats.

 

 

 

 

Although the United States and Brazil will continue
to differ on some important issues as the Uruguay
Round of the GATT negotiations enters its final
months, we believe that last-minute bargaining and
greater Brazilian flexibility will improve chances for
an accommodation with Washington. Brasilia will
persist, however, in its determination to maintain
provisions for “special and differential” treatment for
developing countries that helps protect Brazil’s indus
tries and still will attempt to place limits on US
initiatives involving services, intellectual property
tights, and investment in the GATT,
Page-21
Foreign Investment, We expect the Collor team to
take specific steps to dismantle the complex set of
policies restricting forcign investment. Progress is
most likely in arcas where the President faces the
least constraints on his authority, such as softening
local content requirements and removing barriers to
royalty payments and technical fees to foreign firms.
Scrious barriers to investment in computer-related
ficlds will continue to be a problem!

 

Nuclear Safeguards and Proliferation. There have
been indications of flexibility in Brazil's past refusal
to waive into force the Treaty of Tlatelolco, but no
movement is expected on Brazil's longstanding refusal
to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Collor
has signaled he may move forward on Tlatelolco—
which forbids the presence of nuclear weapons in
Latin America—evidently in the delicf that this pre-
ccdent-breaking move would make Brazil appear
more “responsible” and thereby facilitate its access to
Western technology. Collor also has launched a basic
review of Brazil’s nuclear program, reflecting his
intention to place it under ci

   

Progress on Tlatelolco will most likely be difficult.
‘The treaty's terms would obligate Brazi! to negotiate
and accept a full-scope IAEA safeguards agreement.
within 24 months of waiving Tlatclolco into force.
Collor will have to overcome strong objections from
senior military officers opposed to outside inspection
of parallel nuclear program facilities. In any event, we
expect negotiations on safeguards to drag on beyond
the scope of this Estimate.

Arms Sales, Brazil's arms sales to Iran, Iraq, and
Libya have been a contentious issue in relations with
the United States. With this onset of the crisis in the
Middle East, Collor imposed an embargo on arms
sales to Iraq that we expect him to honor as long as
the UN sanctions are in place. Further, we expect
Brazil to honor its previous assurances that it will not
approve the sale of high-technology equipment to
Libya. Nevertheless, Brazil's main arms exporting
companies, motivated by ongoing financial difficul-
ties, are likely to pursue further arms salcs to other
clients in the Middle East, Collor is unlikely to

 

authorize any politically sensitive arms transfers out
‘of concern not to undercut his objective of drat
closer to Western industrialized countries,

 

 

 

 

 

Technology Transfer. The whole question of US Gov-
ernment controls over transfer of sensitive technology
will remain one of the most contentious topics in US-
Brazil relations. Many senior Brazilian officials, busi-
ness executives, and military officers believe these
controls are designed to cripple Brazilian companics
that are potential competitors of US firms. This
perception has been strengthened by the long delays
Brazilian companies have experienced in their at-
tempts to purchase US high-technology items, such as
supercomputers. We expect Brazilian officials will
press Washington harder to cut through the legal
restrictions and bureaucratic redtape hindering access
to US high technology. Brazil's reluctance to accept
full-scope nuclear safeguards or other technology
controls will cause this issue to remain a major
bilateral irritant.

 

 

 

 

(hit)
(hits)
Page-22
Segfer

Environment. Government funding of environmental
projects will remain difficult because of conflicting
demands on a tight budget. Nevertheless, Collor
appears seriously interested in addressing environ-
mental problems, and we expect continued improve-
ment in the bilateral dialogue in this area. The
President is genuinely concerned about Brazil's ecolo-
gy, even though he wishes to prevent the appearance
of Brazil's being dictated to by other nations on
environmental issues. He also desires to end delays in
disbursements from international loan agencies be-
‘cause of questions about environmental assurances,
‘Thus, Collor has ended most environmentally destruc-
tive subsidies to large-scale agricultural projects in
the Amazon Basin that were previously suspended
under the Sarney government. Morcover, he has all
but formally endorsed the use of debt-for-nature
swaps—a policy reversal—to help in funding environ-
mental projects,

Despite the improved tone on environmental issues,
we expect Brazil to continue to insist that the devel-
oped countries take greater responsibility for globus
environmental problems. Members of the Collor team
will urge the United States and other developed

 

countries to be more forthcoming on technology trans-
fer that would modernize Brazil's industry and reduce
ecological damage. As it prepares to host the 1992

UN Conference on the Environment, Brazil is likely
to assume less nationalistic positions on environmental
issues to avoid incurring further international criti-
cis

Narcotics. The Collor government has assumed a
higher profile in the antinarcotics arena than its
predecessor, but devoting major resources to the
problem in a time of economic belt-tightening will be
difficult. We believe, however, that Collor is con-
cerned about the broad impact of narcotics in Brazil.
He probably will continue publicizing the need for
Brazil to address the problem. He will also take some
concrete action to expand governmentwide antinarco-
tics efforts, including involvement of the Brazilian
armed forces. Nevertheless, he will steadfastly rebuff
any suggestions by other countrics to deploy foreign

military Brazil's domestic counternarcotics
activities|

14