
Page-1
Directur of suf

Cental
+ Lntelligence
ae

 

 

 

 

 

IE 93-87

   

    
   

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: JUN 2002

    

. i 9387
ft 1987 @

om 497
Page-2

Page-3
SNIE 93-87

BRAZIL:
OUTLOOK FOR DEBT

Information available as of 9 April 1987 was wed
in the preparation of this Estimate, which was
approved by the National Foreign Intelligence
Board on that date.
Page-4
seen

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

CONTENTS
Page
Scope Note. 1
: Key Judgment: 3
rae Discussion....... 7
Roots of Brazil’s Problem. 7
Recent Development: 8
Near-Term Political Constraint 9
Brazil's Short-Term Position..... 08
Commercial Creditors Take a Hard Line 12
No Support From Other Creditor: 12
Prospects for 2 Settlement..... 13
Current Positions of Other Debtors. 15
i The Cuban and Soviet Angl 15
i Lessons for Others...... 15

 

 

 

 

i
i
i
|
Page-5
SCOPE NOTE

On 20 February 1987, Brazil declared a moratorium on interest
payments on medium- and long-term commercial debt. ‘This Estimate
addresses the status of Brazil's debt problem, reviewing the economic
and political factors that will affect possible resolution of the problem
over the next 12 to 18 months.
Page-6
KEY JUDGMENTS

We believe the most likely outcome of the current impasse—after
a lengthy hiatus in interest payments—is an accommodation between
Brazil and its creditors, including some precedent-setting terms on the
part of the creditors. The timing of such a settlement is unclear,
however.

Domestic politics in Brazil are working against a quick resolution
of the debt crisis:

— For now, President Sarney appears to believe that he can solve
the debt crisis by extracting major concessions from creditor
banks, thereby furthering his personal political agenda.

— Brazil's new Constituent Assembly is focusing on questions such
as Sarney's term in office, the power of congress, and the role of
the military.

— Leaders of the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB),
senior partner in the governing coalition, are averse to taking
Politically unpopular austerity measures to get the economy
back on track and seem determined to take a hard line on debt.

— The military wants to avoid a high profile on the issue, and is
unlikely to weigh in at this point to pressure Sarney on the debt
problem.

We believe Brazil declared the interest moratorium on medium-
and long-term bank debt without having a game plan. It seems likely
that Brazil's initial position will be to seek a limit on debt payments rel-
ative to GNP with enough leeway to allow for substantial domestic
growth. Brazil will probably also insist on up to 34 billion in “new”
commercial bank funds without monitoring by the International Mone-
tary Fund, Commercial creditors will seek to increase pressure on Brazil
by appearing ready to write off Brazilian debt and positioning them-
selves to cut off short-term trade credits.

Brazil's willingness to negotiate a compromise over the coming
year will be based largely on deteriorating economic conditions. Brazil's
subpar trade performance will put further strains on foreign exchange
reserves and Brazil's ability to import essential materials. We are not
certain, however, how soon these pressures will grow acute, particularly

3
SECRET ode
Page-7
eh é

if bankers reduce short-term eredil lines only gradually. Although Brazil
could limp along for some time, other factors could intervene:

 

 

 

 

— Labor strikes and violence may proliferate, causing serious
social disruption.

— Speculative capital outflows and rapidly rising inflation could
create substantial pressure for a settlement.

As social and economic conditions worsen, we expect civilian and
military leaders initially to urge Sarney to replace Finance Minister
Funaro and his economic team, which they gencrally consider incpt,
and push Sarney to implement tougher stabilization measures to restore
order and to reconcile with bank creditors.

Should Sarney: persist with the present policy course and fail to
provide vital leadership—with or without Funaro—an unraveling
economy and growing social unrest would impel civilian and military
elites to take 2 more active role in governing Brazil and determining
economic policy by (a) accelerating the date of the next presidential
election, (b) curtailing Sarney’s powers, or (c) forcing Sarney to resign in
favor of an interim president.

Meanwhile, pressure also will be rising on the banks, especially the
US money center banks. Bankers might be willing to put together a
package with $2-3 billion of new money to supplement additional
amounts from bilateral and raultilateral lenders and to reschedule debt
due over the next five years on easier terms in return for an agreement
on some key economic terms. At a minimum, the banks would require a
large devaluation of the cruzado, some austerity measures, and some
sort of monitoring mechanism aimed at bringing the current account
i back toward surplus.

 

Should several money center banks withdraw vital short-term
credits, private-sector and military pressures on the government to
reconcile with foreign creditors could increase:

— There is a strong chance, however, that such creditor pressure
tactics would initially harden the government's determination to
maintain its interest moratorium or even provoke a more radical
backlash.

Since Brazilians expect the United States to play an active role in
i solving the debt crisis, as it did in the Mexican case, elements within the
: Brazilian Government will argue that Brazil is being treated less fairly
i than Mexico.

: While we think reconciliation is likely, we cannot rule out an

extended impasse that would bring on default and creditor efforts to
seize Brazil's assets abroad. Brazil and the banks are very far apart, and
Page-8
the potential for miscalculation on bath sides is greater than in any of
the other debt crises in the 1980s. Cooperation among the banks is
wearing thin, particularly after marathon sessions aimed at clearing up
issues with other debtors.

  

A long-term impasse in the Brazilian negotiations with the coun-
try’s creditor banks would not necessarily result in disastrous effects on
the US banking system. Although US banks would experience substan-
tial earnings losses from the unpaid interest, we believe the situation
would be manageable, provided Brazil's actions remain isolated. In the
event other major debtors also sharply limited interest payments, the

: impact on US banks would be much more serious.

Even though other major debtors have indicated they will not now
follow Brazil's lead, the outcome of the Brazilian debt impasse will have
an impact on international debt strategy:

terms with its creditors, others will obviously demand similar
concessions,

— Should the impasse between Brazil and its creditors drag on, the
larger debtors would see a Brazilian impasse as leverage to use
in their own negotiations at some future point.

— Should Brazil receive precedent-setting concessions in coming to

~—Should Brazil's economic conditions seriously worsen, some
debtors, such as Argentina, will be less tempted to follow a
similar course.

The primary determinant of the behavior of other debtors, however,
will remain the level of economic and political pressures felt by their
governments. There is a growing weariness with servicing the debt and -
with continuing subpar economic performance. Should current poor -
external conditions, including slow growth in the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development and low commodity prices,
be coupled with a significant rise in interest rates, other countries for
their own purposes will be tempted to take actions similar to those
undertaken by Brazil.

 

These Key Judgments are
Page-9
sek

 

 

 

 

DISCUSSION

Roots of Brazil's Problom

1, The deterioration in the Braziian economy that
led to the decision to suspend interest payments on
medium- and long-term foreign debt results from the
populist economic policies adopted by President Sar-
ney since he assumed office two years ago. These
policies, which allowed rapid increase in consumption
while discouraging investment, helped drive the offi-
cial inflation rate from 3 percent in November 1986 to
about 15 percent in each of the first two months in
1987—an annual rate exceeding 490 percent (see
figure 1). Interest rates have followed suit, soaring
from an annual rate of about 70 percent to 1,060
Percent in the same period. Meanwhile, on the exter-
nal front, Brazil's large trade surplus dwindled because
of strong consumer demand and an overvalued cruza-
do, foreign investment and new borrowings virtually
dried up, and capital flight accelerated. As a result,
Brazil drew down more then $6 billion of its interna-
tional reserves in an effort to stay current on its debt
‘over the last year|

 

 

2, These economic policies resulted in large mea-
sure from Samey’s perceived need to consolidate
support for himself and for Brazil’s newly restored
democracy as well as to improve conditions for Brazil's
poor. Sarney has faced an uphill struggle for public
and political acceptance since suddenly succeeding to
office in April 1985 after the death of President-elect
Neves. Sarney was distrusted by the Brazilian Demo-
cratic Movement Party (PMDB)—the seaior partner of
the governing alliance that elected the civilian ticket—
because of his longstanding membership in the former
military government's party. The military was unhap-
py with Sarney for defecting from its party. To bolster
his standing with the PMDB and the general populace,
‘Sarney replaced moderate Finance Minister Francisco
Dornelles, who favored undertaking an International
Monetary Fund (IMF) program, with Finance Minister
Dilson Funaro, who assured the President that his
policies could quickly accelerate growth while simul-

taneously easing high inflation. |
3. With Funaro’s guidance, President Sarney an-

nounced on 28 February 1986 a sweeping emergency
program, dubbed the Cruzado Plan, to rein in infla-
tion that was raging at an annual rate of more than

 

 

Figure 1
Brazil: Official Consumer Price Index,
February 1986-February 1987+

Percent
20

 

 

 

 

 

Feb Mar AprMay Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dex Jan Feb
tga0 | “PMY ase 8

“Growth from the previous month.

Untaninies Teron

400 percent. Following a round of wage increases, the
plan mandated a temporary but comprehensive wage
and price freeze, currency reform, and the phasing out
of a pervasive indexation system that had been the
major impediment to conventional efforts to reduce
inflation for more than 20 years. To appease labor,
Brasilia promised a wage adjustment when increases in
the cost of living reached 20 percent.

4. Initially, the plan helped boost growth to 8
percent—just ahove Brazil's historical trend—and
temporarily suppressed inflation from the existing tate
of 15 percent per month to a reported monthly
average of 1.5 percent (see figure 2). For a time, Brazil
was able to sustain large trade surpluses despite the
high rate of domestic growth!

5. Sarney and the PMDB also reaped considerable
benefit from this economic policy as the President's
public approval rating rose from its January 1986 low
Page-10
sl
Figure 2” Tae wale shang
Brazil: Economic Indicators
1981-86
Weal GOP Growth Tafaven a
Percent
cea _
iw
mw Of
i i {|
o

 

Real
Percent

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| AGA).
1981 #2 83 84 85 86° 9 1981 82 83

 

* As a share of GDP.
Estimated.

Contig Wrearee?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

of 35 percent to an unprecedented 90 percent a few
months tater; the PMDB won a landslide victory in the
November }956 gubernatorial and congressional elec:
ip)

6. By the second half of 1986, however, the Cruza-
do Plan was veering seriously off course borause the
government had failed to take followup fiscal and
monetary measures to contain domestic spending.
Rampant consumer demand fueled by artificially low
prices, high wage increases, and insufficient invest
ment in new plant capacity stemming from squeezed
profits and business uncertainty swelled inflationary
pressures. Because the President was loath to raise
prices before the 15 November election, the pressure
created serious price distortions and product shortages.
This high level of domestic demand was in large
measure responsible for the reduction in the monthly
trade surpluses from the rate of roughly $1 billion per
month through September to about $150 million per
month currently

 

7. The international economic climate in 1986 war
conducive to achieving as in 1985 another $12 billion
trade surplus and balanced current account (see table).
Sharply falling international oil prices and interest
rates saved Brazil more than $2 billion in foreign
exchange payments in 1986, The decline in the value
of the US dollar—to which Brazil's currency was
pegged before it was frozen under the Cruzado Plan—
also has bolstered the competitiveness of Brazilian
exports in many major foreign markets. Although
growth in the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) and world commodity
prices remain low by past standards, these conditions
were not significantly worse in 1986 than they were a
year earlier.

Recent Developments

8 The adjustments to the Cruzado Plan that were
made after the November 1986 election were ill timed
and poorly administered, rebounding badly on the
Sarney government. Inflation picked up significantly,
Sarney's popularity declined sharply, capital fight
increased, and a loss of confidence in the government's
economic policy occurred across the board. Business-
men began blatantly to ignore the government's price
guidelines.

a In “sar these rapidly deteriorating condi-
tions, a political consensus developed within the ad-
ministration in favor of tougher action against
creditors:

Newly elected governors and members of the
PMDB coulition publicly advocated Limits on
debt repaynient to support growth.
Page-11
SECKY
Brazil: Balance of Payments, 1995-87
“ys iasz

Trait batanee

Exports

teapots 13,165 3
Net services and trarslens = 12.196 = 12,400

Interest on debe =n 10.000
Current account 5 2.900
‘Capital avcuunt_ 2,509 = 3,500,

Net ditect investment 700 10

‘Net gavernment and 1,000 800

oficial agentes credit

Net commercial bank 2,200 2.500 1.300

and other lending
Change in eserve "=2.200 6,300 A
Financing needs 0 0 3,900
+ Estimated,
Projected.

Estimated obligation under cutrent sgrcements. Interest payments
‘suspended on medium- and long-term debt to international banks on
20 February. Arrearages of about $360 million per month will
accumulate during the suspension.

asec

— Public opinion polls indicated the electorate also
favored a “get tough” stance.

— Although the economic cabinet was initially di-
vided, the near depletion of reserves apparently
helped tilt the decision toward the harder line.

In the end, only business elites argued against such a
policy. These pressures resulted in Brazi!'s decision to
suspend interest payments on medium- and long-term
commercial debt and seek a “political solution” to the
debt problem. We believe a political solution means
Brazil wants Western governments to intervene to
reduce debt payments significantly via radical conces-
sions of some kind, Brasilia’s intended pressure tactics
probably have been encouraged by the success of its
tough bargaining stand in January 1987 in arranging a
rescheduling of $4.1 billion of its obligations to official
Paris Club creditors without IMF conditionaity]

 

 

 

Near-Term Political Constraints

10. We believe that Sarney’s priorities and style,
together with current political constraints, will prevent
Brazil from abandoning its search fer @ radical solution

to the debt problem for at least several months.
Sarney’s key concerns are for his own political life and
that of new democratic processes. Progress on revers-
ing the economic slide and reducing debt service are
crucial to both. Sarney follows a consensus-building
approach to policymaking by consulting widely with
cabinet advisers, congressional leaders, governors, the
military, and business loaders. He is reluctant to adopt
unpopular economic measures—painful im the short
term but nevertheless necessary—that could lead the
Constituent Assembly to shorten his six-year term to
four years or even less. He also realizes, however, that-
continued economic deterioration will hurt him politi-
cally,

LL, Sarney’s main concern for the present is clearly
with Brazil's Constituent Assembly, which began
drafting a new constitution on 15 March 1987 and also
serves as Brazil's congress. Sarney believes it is politi-
cally necessary to hold consultations with the legis
ture and has indicated he will discuss with it any new
economic plan. The numerous decisions that the As-
sembly will deliberate include President Sarney's term
in office, Brazil's future system of government (presi-
Page-12
dential versus parliamentary), the role of the military,
the power of congress, and the treatment of foreign
capital, Although the Constituent Assembly has an
overall moderate, centralist ideological cast (see figure
8), much of its initial work has shown a penchant for
economic nationalism. For example, delegates, espe-
cially those allied with labor, are already surfacing
constitutional provisions for greater control of foreign
capital, including limits on payment of interest on
foreign debt as well as limits on the repatriation of
dividends and royalties. According to the US Embassy,
politicians representing business interests have so far
maintained a low profile but are expected to defend
their_interests more vigorously in coming months.

 

12. Sarney especially must respect the wishes of the
Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, the senior
partner of the governing alliance. (Sarney nominally is
head of the PMDB but had to give up a leadership
Position in the Liberal Front Party to assume the
presidency.) The PMDB carries more weight than ever
in the Sarney administration's policymaking process as
a result of the November 1986 election, which put it in

 

control of both houses in the pst Constituent Assem-
ly and 21 of 23 governorships)

 

 

 

 

[Numerous press
reports indicate that PMDB leaders are determined to
make their hardline views on foreign debt stick. They
believe limits on foreign debt payments not only will
free up federal revenue for social projects but also will
refurbish their images as champions of the working
class. Through Finance Minister Funaro, the PMDB
has succeeded in implementing most of its economic
platform, including growth-oriented policies, expand-
ed social programs, and refusal to submit to an IMF
program.

18. We believe it is unlikely in the short term that
Sarney’s Finance Minister will be removed in favor of
someone who will offer more moderate action. Indeed,
Finance Minister Funaro recently has increased his
power and influence in the government's economic
policy making process. Despite the growing pressures
on the President from many Brazilian groups to
replace Funaro, Sarney continues to support his Fi-
nance Minister:

 

— Dissenters from Funaro’s unorthodox policy pre-
scriptions, most notably Central Bank President
Fernao Bracher and Planning Minister Jose

 

Figure 3
Brazil: Idcolegtcal Composition of the
Constituent Assembly

 

Center 32.45
TAL members

  
  
   
   
  

Comter-right 23%

Conterteft 22.85, 131 members

126 members

Leh 93% ie Right 124%

$2 membets

ee ib Tanwar (941 Sao Paulo newspaper.
ee of Assembly members is $59.

Note Tne
The tou al

 

 

 

Trasee

Py
Sayad, have resigned. A Funaro protege was

installed as the head of the Central Bank. Al-
though a conservative PMDB politician was ap-
pointed planning minister, the Ministry's charter
was changed to include only social rather than
economic planning.

 

 

 

 

—Funaro is the government's leading economic
spokesman, as demonstrated by his recent trip to
approach official creditors for @ political solution
to the debt and_in_his authoritative domestic
press interviews!

Various sources indicate that Sarney would be likely to
seek his resignation only in the wake of a serious
deterioration in the Brazilian economy, a process that
will become more pronounced Jater in the year. Even
in this event, it is not certain that Funaro’s initial
replacement use significantly more ortho-
dox policies. (

14. Sarney also faces problems from organized
labor. In 1985 the two major Brazilian labor federa-
tions—the militant, Marxist-dominated Unified Work-
ers Central (CUT) and the broader based, moderate
General Workers Confederation (CGT)—exploited
Sarney's tenuous political position by launching 2
series of strikes and obtaining higher wages and other
labor reforms. Most iecently, they collaborated in
organizing 2 general strike in December 1986 with
several independents to protest Sarney’s adjustments to
the price freeze and to call for a moratorium cn
foreign devt. Both majot unicns are using the debt
Page-13
‘The Other Political Pocties

‘The Liberal Front Party (PEL). with its center-right
volitical orientation, maintains appreciable influence
with the Sarney administration as the minority partner
of the alliance. Several af Sarney’s cabinet posts are
occupied by PFL members, althnugh none is involved
in cconomic policy. Within congress, the US Embassy
notes, the PEL has become a sufficiently disciplined
force to offset effectively the PMDB left wing on many:
issucs. According toa generally relichle source, the PEL.
recently has become badly disillusioned with the
government's economic program and is withdrawing
support from Funato's policies. Its eronomie policy
views reportedly are now aligned with these propound-
ed by the Social Democratic Party (PDS), the rightwing
descendant from the majority party under the military
government. PDS leadership, according to the US Em-
assy, is impressing political observers with its
sive criticism of economic policy and the deci
suspend interest payments. Both the PFL and the 70S
will probably counsel moderation in the Samey govern-
ment’s relations with creditors, including an early end
to the moratorium.

 

 

  

Brazil's two largest leftist parties—the Democratic
Workers Party (PDT) and the Workers Party (PT}—
have increasingly been accepted by the public as
legitimate and responsible political opponents and, con-
sequently, have increased their size and inBuence. The
PDT was founded by Gov. Leonel Brizola primarily as
4 political vehicle to gain the presidency. Although in
public statements to lure the more educated he likens
the party's ideology to European social democracy, he
uses highly nationalistic arid socialist rhetoric to appeal
to lower classes, including qualified support for the
suspension of foreign interest payments and, more
recently, demanding an audit to weed out “illegiti-
mate” debt. The PT is an umbrella group of Marxist
Parties, headed by Labor leader Lula de Silva, that
supports labor militancy to improve workers’ living
standards. Lula has campaigned along socialist lines,
advocating an economic system that redistributes eco-
nomic gain more equitably. Lula joined Castro's call for
Latin = governments to repudiate their debts in

 

1985,

 

issue to gain rank-and-file support, and the CUT
leadership has mounted a propaganda campaign for
outright debt repudiation.

15. Brazil's industrialists have e increasingly
dissatisfied with the government's economic policies
since mid-1986 and some businessmen are mounting a

 

political campaign to effect changes. According to the
US Embassy and Brazil’s press, business groups have

 

complained about the Sarney administration's exces-
sive dependence on price controls, its lack of commit-
ment to public-sector reform, and its current economic
drift. They also have reacted negatively—by a series
of scathing editorials in the conservative press—to the
government's moratorium on debt payments. They
argue that not only does the moratorium put at risk the
country’s previously good relations with creditors but
will also severely damage foreign trade and invest-
ment. According to the US Embassy, the Sao Paulo
State Federation of Industries (FIESP) believes that the
Sarney government should quickly implement a credi-
ble economic stabilization plan and seach an early
agreement with commercial creditors. Although busi-
nessmen have not had a major voice in the administra-
tion’s policy deliberations, they have a latent power to
influence Sarney by sabotaging his economic plans.

   

 

16. The military historically has served as an arbi-
ter in Brazilian politics and the ultimate guarantor of
internal stability and security. US military attache
reporting indicates that Brazil’s armed forces remain
firmly in support of democratic rule and, indeed, are
among President Sarney's most important backers.
Nevertheless, the military high command has private-
ly begun to express serious concern about the stability
‘of the Sarney administration. Since December 1986,
generally reliable sources have indicated that the
military cabinet ministers are increasingly distressed
by the government's indecision and inability to arrest
Brazil's rapid economic deterioration, which also is
eroding military salaries. Most recently, according to
the same sources, they stressed that the military will
act within the bounds of its constitutional authority,
but cannot stand by and permit serious economic
deterioration that could result in a breakdown in social
order.

 

Brazil's Short-Term Position

17. Sarney believes he has the upper hand in his
confrontation with the banks and will concentrate on
domestic issues while waiting to see if foreign creditors
cave in and meet Brazil’s demands for radicat conces-
sions, Finance Minister Funaro maintains that Brasilia,
will not undertake a major new domestic program, in
part because the government believes its current poli-
cies already are causing economic growth and infla-
tion to slow. Accordingly, Brasilia probably will insti-
tute few significant domestic reforms or adjustments—
such as trimming the bloated government budget.
Page-14
Anstead, Brasilia, for the present, probably intends to
continue patchwork econcmi measures and ta rely on
government interventionist policies. The Sarney ad-
ministration may opt for another price freeze after
sufficient time has elapsed for prices to ccalign after
the last freeze. In addition, it will continue to reintro-
duce indexation mechanisms into the economy to help
case the brunt of high inflation.

 

  

   
 

18. The Sarney government has not yet either set a
date to commence negotiations with bankers or di-
vulged the details of the new financial package it will
propose to the international banking community. In-
deed, we believe it has not yet formulated a compre-
hensive economic package. According to the press,
Sarney and Finance Minister Funaro said they will
present a proposal to Brazil’s creditors that stresses
economic growth more than paying debts. They con-
tinue to insist that an IMF monitoring role is out of the
question. According to press reports, Brasilia will seek
a limit to net debt transfers of 2.5 percent of GDP to
enable the country to maintain 7-percent annual
economic growth. US Embassy reporting indicates that
Brazil's proposal to private creditors will include a
request for at least $4 billion of “new” money and
multiyear rescheduling of commercial debt on terms
‘equal to or better than those Mexico received last year.
Finance Minister Funaro, according to generally reli-
able sources, also may push for a contingency clause
that would limit debt servicing payments in the event,
of resurging interest rates. In addition, Brasilia has
already announced plans to freeze the country’s $15
billion in short-term credits and interbank deposits in
the event bankers attempt to cut these facilities.

 

 

Commercial Creditors Toke a Hard Line

19. The bank advisory committee (BAC) represent-
ing Brazil's creditors is taking a strong stand at the
start against Brastlia's proposals. Members of the com-
mittee are growing extremely concerned about Brazil's
worsening balance of payments, failure to institute a
credible economic program, heavyhanded tactics, and
failure to set a date for negotiations, Most bankers
continue to be opposed to committing new loans
without an IMF-supported program, according to
these same sources. Even with some role for the IMF,
representatives of the BAC believe that raising new
money will be extremely difficult, especially in light
of Brasilia’s tampering with their short-term credits,
which traditionally are serviced even during the most

severe debt confrontations [

 

 

1V.. Varios sources indicate that the differing inter-
ests among the US money center banks, the smaller US
regional banks, and the non-US banks will impede the
formation of a consensus on financial support for
Brazil. Most money center banks, with their heavy
foan exposures in Brazil, will probably continue to
Fines and push for a
n financial package, perhaps at the
cost of dropping a rigorous IME monitoring require-
ment, in order to get Brazil to restart iuterest pay-
ments. A few of the money center banks nevertheless
ate intensifying pressure on Brazil by taking steps to
place Brazil's loans on a nonaccrual basis. In contrast,
US regional banks are hardening their attitudes toward
Brazil as a result of the moratorium. Some regional
banks already have taken steps to withdraw short-term
credit lines, and numerous others are reportedly con-
sidering either placing their loans on a nonaccrual
basis or writing off their entire exposures. West Euro-
pean and Japanese banks also are becoming less willing
participants in new money deals for Latin American
borrowers, preferring interest rate capitalization or
other forms of debt relief. Although non-US banks
would be hurt by a prolonged interest suspension. they
‘generally are in better shape than the major US banks
to absorb the financial losses because of greater re~
serves against troubled loans and regulations that make
it easier to write off debts.

 

  

  

No Support From Other Creditors

21. Finance Minister Funaro’s entourage apparent-
ly received little encouragement from Western gov-
‘ernment leaders in its search for “a political solution”
tothe debt problem during a tour of the United States,
Western Europe, and Japan in early March. Although
the Brazilians obtained some expressions of sympathy
for their debt action and a few small government
export credits in Europe, most Western officials im-
pressed upon Brazil the need to work with the IMF
and to apply remedial measures to its inflation-ridden
economy. According to the US Embassy, the Govern-
ments of France, West Germany, and the United
States reported to the Paris Club that each was
unresponsive to Funaro’s calf for a political solution of
the debt. Instead, they urged the Brazilians to recon-
cile their differences with bank creditors as soon as
possible. Moreover, a number of the Western govern-
ments indicated they probably would not reopen
official credit lines as a followup to the Paris Club
accord until bilateral government-to-government
agreements were signed, a position that Funaro main~
tains violates Brazil's January Paris Club accord.
Page-15
siglo

 

 

 

 

Getting Debt Negotiations To Stort

 

Currently, the basis for the startup of debt negotia-
Uwons does nat exist, mainly because Brasilia has yet to
present an economic plan to the banks. On 2 April 1987,
Finance Minister Funaro revealed a program for fi-
nancing economic development before a PMDB caucus.
According to the program. Brazil will need an average
$4 billion in additional Gnaneial resources cach year
through 1991 to enable Brazil to achieve 7-percent
annual growth. The additional funds would be generat-
ed by significantly lawering the average cost of debt
servicing, automatically reBnancing part of interest
Payments, and converting debt to equity. According to
the US Embassy, however, government officials
said they have not yet agr

  

    

 

i
li

 

Prospects for a Settlement

22. We believe the mest likely outcome of the
current impasse—after a lengthy hiatus in interest
payments—is for an accommodation between the
creditors and Brazil, including some precedent-setting
terms on the part of the creditors, The timing of such a
settlement is unclear, however. Brazil's willingness to
negotiate a compromise with its bank creditors over
the coming year will depend heavily on the emergence
of political pressures for a settlement stemming from
serious economic deterioration and resulting social
disorder. Finance Minister Funato’s current economic
strategy of adjusting price controls, reindexing the
economy, and undertaking modest efforts to contain
‘government spending or monetary expansion will lead

to some deterioration of domestic economic conditions
over the coming months. Hence, we expect a further
contraction of investment, slower economic growth,
rising unemployment, and continued high intlation. In
addition, without a substantial devaluation of the
cruzado, Brazil's subpar trade performance will put
further strains on foreign exchange reserves and Bra-
2il's ability ¢o import esseritial materials

23. We are not certain, however, how soon these
Pressures will grow acute, particularly if banks reduce
short-term credit lines only gradually, thereby allow:
ing foreign trade to continue. Brazil could Simp along
for some time, perhaps a year or more. Other factors
could intervene, however. At some point, repressed
inflation will accelerate rapidly as a result of high
government spending, spot shortages, and high wage
settlements. Furthermore, as social and economic con-
ditions worsen, labor strikes and violence will be likely
to proliferate, causing serious economic and social
disruption. These disruptions could fuel speculative
capital outflows, putting substantial downward pres-
sure on the cruzado, and could create an environment
in which pressures within Brazil would escalate rapid-
|

24. As economic and social difficulties grow acute,
we expect thut Brazil's civilian elite, with the support
of the military, will bring influence to bear more
forcefully on the Satney administration's policies. The
large and powerful industrial class—hobbled by
‘squeezed profits, reduced supplies of foreign inputs,
and increasing dominance of the public sector—would
play & prominent role in this process. Initially, we
expect civilian and military leaders to urge Sarney to
replace Finance Minister Funaro and his economic
team, which they generally consider inept, and push

  
 

“SSarney to implement tougher stabilization measures to

restore order and to reconcile with bank creditors.
‘While such measures may worsen economic conditions
for a time, the military would work with the civilian
administration to keep order!

25, Should President Sarney persist in the present
policy course and fail to provide vital leadership—
with or without Funaro—an unraveling economy and
growing social unrest would impel civilian and mili-
tary elites to take a more active role in governing
Brazil and determining economic policy by (a) acceler-
ating the date of the next presidential election, (b)
curtailing Sarney’s powers, or (c) forcit ey to
resign in favor of an interim president,

26. Should several major money center banks with-
draw vital short-term credits, private-sector and mi
tary pressures on the government to reconcile with

 

13,

eT
Page-16
SEC Ly

Impact of Brazil's Debt Actions on US Banks

 

 

TE Brazil docs not resume setvicits its mediui
long-term debt, US banks will face two Gnancial
stones in the coming months. When the payments are
90 days past due, banks must {ist the unserviced loans as
nonperforming. Banks also have the option of listing the
foans as nonperforming before the 90-day deadline, and
a number of major banks already have done so. Interest
accrued but not actually collected must be subtracted
from income. Subsequent interest payments will be
counted as income only when actually received. The
effect of putting Brazil's loans ina nonperforming status
oF recording loan interest only when {t is received
would cut the nine money center banks’ quarterly
earnings about 15 to 20 percent. The banking commu-
nity will seek to reach an agreement to avoid ears
losses with Brazil before any action is required!

  

 

 

Mf Brazil were to withhold interest payments for 160
days and there were no definite prospect for a restora~
tion of debt service, regulatory policy requires that US.
Government bank regulators classify Brazil's loans as
value impaired. Once such @ classification is made,
banks generally would have one year to place an
amount equal to 10 percent of the loan principal ina
special reserve known as the Allocated Transfer Risk
Reserve. In subsequent years, 15 percent would have to
be allocated to reserves annually, unless the situation
improves. At the discretion of the regulators, the
amount can be changed. Money set aside in this special
reserve does nol count toward the banks’ capital, and is
not deductible for tax purposes. Alternatively, a bank
‘can write down or reduce the book value of the loan by
an amount equal to the special reseeve.

 

foreign creditors could increase. There is a strong
chance, however, that such creditor pressure tactics
would initially harden the government's determina-
tion to maintain its interest mcratorium or even
provoke a more radical backlash. Since Brazilians
expect the United States to play an active role in
solving the debt crisis, as it did in the Mexican case,
elements within the Brazilian Government will argue
that Brazil is being treated less fairly|

27. While pressure is rising on Brazil, pressure also
is rising on the US money center banks. They might be
willing to put together a packaze with $2-3 billion of
new wmoney to supplement an equal amount from
bilateral and multilateral lenders and to reschedule
debt due over the next five years on easier terms—
including a reduction in the interest spread over the
London Interbank Offering Rate (LIBOR) from 2 to 1
percent or less—in return for agreement on some key
economic terms. The banks would, at a minimum,

 

tequice # large devaluation of the cruzado and sone
austerity measures, aimed at bringing the current
account back toward surplus, before offering up new
money. Some sort of monitoring mechanism also
would have to be included,

26. Although we think it unlikely, there is some
chance that Brazil and its creditors will fail te break
their prolonged negotiating impasse and that the
Sarney administration will extend its moratorium on
interest payments well beyond a year. Under such
circumstances, the government would take few, if any,
constructive adjustment measures but would tempo-
rarily shield the public from the consequences through
heavy state intervention, including price controls and
greater spending on social programs. Under this sce-
nario, Brazil's military—rucial to the outcome in any
event—might view the banks’ actions as hostile and
decide to back Sarney's hardline stand]

29. A long-term impasse in the Brazilian negoti
tions its creditor banks would not necessarily
result in disastrous effects on the US banking system.
Although US banks would experience substantial earn-
ings losses from the unpaid interest, we believe the
situation would be manageable, provided Brazil's ac-
tions remain isolated. In the event other major debtors
also sharply limited interest payments, however, the
impact on US banks would be much more serious.

 

   

 

 

30. We believe Brazil could endure a lengthy break
with creditors, but only at substantial cost to its
economy. Many years of import-substitution industri-
alization policies have considerably reduced Brazil's
dependence on a number of basic imported goods,
including energy, raw materials, and consumer prod-
ucts. Its recently inaugurated economic integration
scheme with Argentina and Uruguay further improves
its position to withstand the impact of constricted
trade relations with Western developed countries.
Moreover, Brazil has established channels for, and
experience in, countertrade with numerous ‘Third
World countries, an added advaniage in evading trade
sanctions. Brazil probably would expand its exports of
arms as well—already a major foreign exchange earn:
er. Nevertheless, the costs of autarky will be substan-
tial and will wear heavily on Brazil over time by
confining the country to long-term economic stagfla-
tion. Without further access to foreign capital and
state-of-the-art technology—which has been a vital
ingredient in Brazil's past industrialization successes—
Brazil's ecunomic modernization and development
drive will be slowed and the country will lose signifi-
cant ground in its quest to become a major economic
power.
Page-17
Current Positions of Other Debtors

81. The unilateral Srazilian moratorium on interest
payments comes at a time when many other Thitd
World debtors are experiencing deterioration of their
external accounts because of poor export performances
and dwindling capital inflows. A number of the more
important debtors have negotiated or ate in the pro-
cess of negotiating with their international creditors
new and favorable financial packages that they will be
reluctant to fcopardize. Although a number of debtors
are studying Brazil's action and the impact it will have
‘on debt aegotiations to see if it will eventually work to
their advantage, few Third World governments have
publicly lauded Brazil’s moratorium or have any
inclination to follow suit until they are able to see the
‘outcome of the Brazilian situation.

 

 

 

 

92. Mexico gave public assurances that it will con-
Ninue to service its debt and not follow Brazi! in
declaring a moratorium. President de la Mudrid’s top
priority is to restore economic growth and deliver a
smooth victory for his ruling party in next year's
rational election. Realizing that he necds fresh credit
to achieve this goal, de la Madrid will avoid action that
could jeopardize the $7.7 billion commercial loan
package. The banks plan to disburse a first installment,
amounting to $3.5 billion, in late April 1987,

98. Argentina indicated initially that it would sus-
pend interest payments on its debt if Western banks
refuse to provide more than $2 billion in new loans,
but has since demonstrated its preference for cooper-
ating with the international financial community.
President Alfonsin has announced a new stabilization
program, negotiated a $1.4 billion loan with the IMF,
gained a pledge from 12 developed countries for a
$500 million bridge loan, and {s making progress in
new money and debt rescheduling talks with banks.

  

 

34. The Philippines reached an agreement in
March 1987 with its bank advisory committee to
reschedule $10.2 billion of its medium- to long-term
debt at an interest rate of seven-eighths of a percent-
age point over LIBOR. In addition, $3 billion in trade
credits were rolled over with the interest spread over
TIBOR reduced to three-quarters of a percentage
point. Creditor banks were also given an option of
converting some of their interest receipts into Philir~
pine investment notes thut would finance guvernment-
approved investments in the country}

$5. Both Chile and Venezuela wrapped up favor-
able accords with international banks within days after
the Brazilian action. Santiago not only gained a cut in
its interest spread over LIBOR from 2 to 1 percent but

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

also was able to postpone payment of $440 million by
persuading the banks to accept interest payments
annually instead of semiannually. Caracas won a
lightening of its scheduled principal repayments and
an even lower intercst rate spread of seven-cighths of a
Percentage point over LIBOR on its $21 billion re-
scheduling package,

The Cuban and Soviet Perspectives

86. Cuba is using the Brazilian debt payment mora-
torium as an opportunity to rekindle carlier rhetoric
advocating collective action by Third World countries
against Western creditors. Cuban President Fidel Cas-
tro loudly applauded the Brazilian moratcrium as a
historic move, claiming that the time was ripe for the
poor of the world te right injustices perpetrated at the
hands of creditors. Havana also made the debt burden
‘a major focus of the March 1987 Nonaligned Move-
ment ministerial meeting in Guyana in order to
strengthen its image as a Third World political leader
and to bolster its newly developing relations with
Brazil. Nevertheless, Havana probably has lost much
of its already limited credibility in the eyes of many
Third World debtors by negotiating with its own
creditors as it urged aggressive action by others.

‘87. The Soviet Union is privately expressing sym-
pathy for Brazil's debt problems and is willing to
increase bilateral trade. Moscow will probably quietly
use the opportunity to play on regional resentment
against the United States ant other Western creditors.
Concern for their own economic interests, however,
will be likely to keep the Soviets from publicly
endorsing unilateral moratoriums by Latin debtors.
Moscow has urged Cuba—which, along with Peru and
Nicaragua, is substantially in debt to the USSR—to
tone down its calls for Latin debt repudiation as weil.

Lessons for Others

88, Even though other major debtors have indicat-
ed they will not now follow Brazil’s lead, the outcome
of the Brazilian debt impasse will have an impact on
international debt strategy:

—Should Brazil receive precedent-setting conces-
sions in coming to terms with its creditors, others
will obviously demand similar concessions.

— Should the impasse between Brazil and its credi-
tors drag on, others will be likely to stay on the
sidelines to watch the outcome, although the
larger debtors would see 2 Brazilian impasse as
leverage to use in their own negotiations at some
future point.
Page-18
—Should other debtors feel that, by taking this
confrontational course, Brazil worsened econoin-
ic conditions more than would have been the
ease under a cooperative tack, some, such as
Argentina, will be less tempted to follow a
similar caurse,]

99. The primary determinant of the behavior of
ather debtors, however, will remain the level of

 
 
 

economic and political pressure felt by the
ments, There isa growing weariness with servi
debt and the continuing subpar economic perfor-
mance. Should current poor external conditions in-
cluding siow OECD growth and low commodity prices
be coupled with a significant rise in interest rates,
other countries for their own purposes will be tempted
to take actions similar to those undertaken by Brazil.

 

 

 

 

 

16
‘SE
Page-19

Page-20

Page-21

Page-22
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Directorate of Inteligence. Becavie of the
semitive native of some source material reflected herein, this copy is for the exchsive
information and vie of the recipient only.

2, This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in mccordonce with applicable
‘security regulations, or returned to the Directorate of Intaligence.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it for a
period not in excess of one year, At the end of this period, the document shoud be destroyed
‘or returned io the forwording agency, or permission should be requested of the forwarding
‘gency to retain it in accordance with LAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953,

4. The ttle of this document when used seporately from the text is unclassified.
