
Page-1
fs Mandatory Review
Case # NEL ee! rhe
Documen: # az:

je

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

"1 5 JUL 1993

 

"Submitted by the : _
DIRECTOR OF, CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE nee
: Concurred in by the ve vee
: UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

22 JULY 1964
Page-2
By Director of Intelligence and jearch, Department of State
"Director, Defense ‘Intelligence ‘Agency
- Diréctor of the National Security Agency

     
   
  

   

es Abstaining:

The Atomic’ Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the Assistant Di-

rector, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
’ jurisdiction.

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans- .
mission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited,

 

GRouP 1
Excluded from automatic .
downgrading and
declassification
Page-3
><

re Wee ite dia aledactioal

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 12-64

Pe eee ee eee

aon

Changing Patterns in Eastern Europe

Pr et aurea:
Page-4
ET

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

    

 

Page
THE PROBLEM ...... 2.0.0.0. o eee e cece e cece ceeeceeseeveeeees 1
CONCLUSIONS 2.02... cece cece cc ec eeceeeeeeeenees 1
DISCUSSION 3
I. THE SITUATION IN EASTERN EUROPE ................20.-2.--- 3
The USSR and Eastern Europe ........ 0... 00.000c0cccecceeeeeecuees 3
Factors of Change ......0...00 00.0 c cece cece eee ceceeeeseeeeeeees 5
Internal Developments .......... 0.00.0 0c ccc ee cee ec eee ebeceseeuees 6
TL. PROSPECTS oo... eee eee e cece cece ee eeneeenes 8
General 2.06... oie ee eect eens eens 8
The Outlook for Political Stability ...0..0...0.00..000e cece eee
The Economic Outlook ......... 2.0... cc cee e eee e eens vee. 10
Relations Among Communist Countries ...............0 0.200... 0000. il
Page-5
CHANGING PATTERNS
IN EASTERN EUROPE

THE PROBLEM

To assess the situation and outlook in the Eastern European countries
and their external relations over the next few years.

_CONCLUSIONS

A. Eastern Europe has entered upon its third post-Stalin phase.
The years 1953-1957 were marked by popular upheavals and the
danger of disintegration, and the next several years by consolidation
and relative quiet. The present is marked once more by a preoccupa-
tion with change and we look for a period of political liveliness and
fluidity. (Paras. I-11, 22)

B. In the minds of most Eastern Europeans, however, the basic
fact of Communist rule is not now in dispute. It is rather the question
of the national future, within the framework of a Communist system,
which is being subjected to examination and experiment. The in-
ternal issues are those of liberalization and economic reform. These
in turn are closely related to the problems of autonomy within the
Communist camp and relations with the West. Increasingly, the
leaders of Eastern Europe are feeling free to approach these questions
less in the light of Soviet wishes or the supposed common interests
of the Bloc, more in the light of national aspirations and local political
conditions. (Paras. 8, 12, 24)

C. One result of this trend, which is likely to continue for the next
several years, is a growing diversification in Eastern Europe. Out-
siders, including the USSR, will find it increasingly hard to apply a
general analysis and a general policy to the area. We expect in
most of these countries some movement toward political liberalization
and a search for better balance and more efficient methods in managing
Page-6
ET

the economy. Economic progress, while likely to show some improve-
ment over the generally dismal record of the last two years, will not
be such as to diminish dissatisfaction and impatience in the near
future. Political evolution is not likely to proceed at a speed which
threatens the Communist regimes. ( Paras. 22, 24-25, 29-30, 33)

D. In external relations, we expect a similar uneven evolution away
from the tutelage, of Moscow and toward closer contacts with Western
Europe and the US. We believe that the Soviets would consider direct
military intervention in Eastern Europe only in emergency circumstan-
ces, when they believed vital Soviet interests to be threatened.
In political terms, the irreducible Soviet demand probably is that these
regimes should remain professedly Communist and continue at least
formal membership in the Warsaw Pact. So long as these limits are
not transgressed we believe that the USSR is prepared to tolerate con-
siderable divergence in internal policies and even to acquiesce re-
luctantly in further manifestations of independence in foreign policy.
Most countries will almost certainly seek to develop their economic
and cultural relations with the West at a rapid rate, though the econ-
omies of Eastern Europe will remain closely tied to that of the USSR.
(Paras. 24, 31-82, 34, 36)

E. Though we believe that these trends will unfold gradually and
without major upheavals, we are conscious of the possibility of sharp
instability and even violent shifts. The chances of change of this
sort depend to some extent upon each country’s success in managing
domestic problems and party factionalism. Developments in the
Soviet Union will probably be equally important. If the USSR con-
tinues to falter in its competition with the West, to lose prestige in
the contest within the Communist movement, or to give an impression
of uncertainty in its policy, Easter European nationalism may be
moved to bolder ventures. These possibilities will also be heightened
during the succession period in Soviet politics, which is likely to breed
factionalism, nervousness, and exaggerated hopes and fears in Eastern
Europe. (Paras. 26-27)
Page-7
DISCUSSION

|, THE SITUATION IN EASTERN EUROPE

The USSR and Eastern Europe

1. When Stalin died in 1953, Soviet control over Eastern Europe was strong
and the Satellite regimes could not have survived without it. Stalin had as-
sured direct political control by installing obsequious leaders such as Rakosi
and Bierut and supervising them on the spot through Soviet ambassadors and
periodically through official party emissaries. Stalin had also frequently en-
gineered purges within the Communist parties to eliminate real or potential
dissidents. The secret police were controlled from Moscow by an elaborate
system of Soviet “advisers” and by direct penetration at all levels. Soviet offi-
cers controlled the Satellite armed forces, with the help of Soviet “advisers”
attached to staffs down to fieldgrade level. Political control was augmented by
direct control over the economies, which were still being exploited by the
USSR. Moscow supervised all planning, trade was largely limited to Bloc
partners, and contact of every kind with the outside world was minimal.

2, Upon coming to power, Khrushchev regarded it as important to correct
what he considered to be Stalin’s gross errors of policy towards Eastern
Europe—in particular, his blatant exploitation of the Satellite economies and
his arbitrary, coercive approach. He therefore set out to establish Soviet rela-
tions with these countries on a new basis—one which relied less on coercion
and more on voluntary cooperation. Khrushchev also considered it a major
error that Yugoslavia had been excluded from the bloc of Communist states,
and he strove to bring Yugoslavia back into it.

3. Khrushchev made some progress in 1955 and early 1956, but the convul-
sions in Poland and Hungary later that year showed that he had seriously
underestimated the problem. Clearly the Communist regimes were not strongly
enough established to resist nationalism and pressures for liberalization. Ac-
cordingly, in 1957, Khrushchev moved to reconstitute the fabric of Soviet au-
thority in Eastern Europe, in the process calling on Chinese assistance and
thereby encouraging Peiping’s larger ambitions. The Bloc was consolidated at
the Moscow conference that year, but at the price of the continued exclusion
of Yugoslavia.

4, When in later years the dispute between the USSR and China became
evident, the role of each individual Communist party took on new importance.*

Not only was Soviet authority openly challenged, but China’s insistence on a
general condemnation of Yugoslavia made that country again a central prob-

1 For a fuller discussion of the impact of the Sino-Soviet dispute on Eastern Europe, see
NIE 10-2-64, “Prospects for the International Communist Movement,” dated 10 June 1964,

paragraphs 7-12.
Ot 3
Page-8
d«

Jem in Bloc politics. The interaction of these two developments led to a
serious Soviet defeat in Eastern Europe, when Albania successfully defied the
USSR and joined with China against Moscow. The Albanian leaders’ hostility
to Khrushchev and to his rapprochement with Tito arose from their acute
fears of a Moscow-Belgrade conspiracy to restore Yugoslav hegemony over
Albania, The Soviets were unable by political subversion and pressure or by
economic sanctions to bring the Albanians to heel and proved unwilling to
resort to military force because of the practical and political difficulties involved.

5. As the Sino-Soviet dispute intensified, Khrushchey was forced to defend :
more vigorously his efforts to re-establish some relationship between Tito and
the Soviet Bloc. Despite the lessons of 1955-1956, the imperatives of the Sino-
Soviet conflict led Khrushchev to urge the other East Europeans to follow
the Soviet lead in improving relations with Yugoslavia. In this process, how-
ever, Khrushchev was forced to accept Tito largely on the latter’s own terms,
In fact, Khrushchev recognized Tito’s “different road” to socialism, and even
publicly endorsed certain Yugoslav innovations in Communist development.
The Yugoslav and Albanian examples thus combined to suggest that the USSR
on the one hand favored considerable autonomy, and on the other was limited
in its ability to enforce predetermined limits,

6, This Soviet predicament has been dramatically demonstrated more recently
by the behavior of Rumania. Rumanian intransigence was the product, prima-
rily, of Gheorghiu-Dej’s early opposition to de-Stalinization, of longstanding eco-
nomic grievances against the USSR, and of increased confidence as a result of eco-
nomic successes, Determined to pursue rapid industrialization come what may,
the Rumanians refused to modify their economic development program in spite
of pressure by the USSR and other Communist countries, An awakening na-
tionalism, encouraged since 1962 by Soviet concessions to national sovereignty, has
prompted the Rumanians to act more and more independently in various aspects
of foreign policy. They have refused to support Soviet actions against China,
and have even presumptuously offered to mediate the Sino-Soviet conflict. In
April 1964 they openly declared their determination to act as an independent
Communist country.

7. Meanwhile, in the early sixties, the pattern of relations in Eastern Europe
was also affected by developments outside the Communist world, One factor
of major importance was the new view of the world strategic balance which
was a worldwide consequence of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962. Previously,
East European Communists had been led to believe that the Soviets possessed

"an advantage in strategic weapons which would enable them to make major
gains against the West. The crisis, however, made it evident that, far from
possessing such an advantage, the Soviets were forced to draw back, and to
alter their tactics toward the West. Similarly, the evident prosperity and
vitality of Western Europe in the sixties cast doubt on Communist contentions
about the direction of history and excited simple envy. The general result

‘ PR
es:
Page-9
was to reduce Soviet prestige in Eastern Europe and encourage thinking about
the future in more nationalistic terms.

Factors of Change

8. The consequence of this history is that, while the Soviet presence in Eastern
Europe remains strong, there is now considerable scope for indigenous factors
which are potentially inimical to that presence. Probably the strongest of
these is nationalism, which has reappeared in dynamic form, most notably in
Ruinania and Slovakia. Whatever its direct targets and its peripheral benefits
to certain Soviet policies (as in continuing fears of West Germany), nationalism
in Eastern Europe is essentially incompatible with Soviet domination. Further,
it is, as an emotional force, a particularly difficult form of opposition and
pressure for the Soviets to combat. This is especially the case when it is able
to gain a firm hold on the minds of the Communist leaders themselves, as it
did in Hungary and Poland in 1956 and seems to be doing in Rumania in
1964. In any case, few Eastern European Communist leaders remain who
are ready to execute Soviet desires without regard to the implications for their
own country.

9. Related to this development is a trend away from a doctrinaire approach
and toward greater moderation in internal policy. Throughout the area, the
men who led in establishing the present regimes are growing old and are
giving way gradually to a new generation whose experience with communism
is not in staging a revolution but in managing a state. Whereas many of the
attitudes and habits of the older leaders were conditioned by early training
in the USSR, by revolutionary fervor, arid by close ties with the Soviet party,
many of the younger leaders, having no such bonds, tend to respond more to
the needs and traditional attitudes of their own countries.

10. The gradual trend away from doctrinaire policies has also been the
result of economic necessity. The realization is growing, especially in the
more industrialized countries, that adequate economic performance depends
increasingly on care and sophistication in planning and management. But in
spite of much experimentation, there has been no real progress toward devising
effective incentives in economies still run predominantly by command. Already,
however, greater restraint is apparent in the adoption of less ambitious economic
plans, a fact which should diminish the likelihood of serious mistakes and
create more favorable conditions for technical and qualitative improvements.

11. Finally, throughout Eastem Europe the intelligentsia are exerting stronger
pressures to end their isolation from the West and to find a way back to an
association with cultural trends in Europe. They have been stimulated by
periodic relaxations in Soviet cultural controls and by various official policies,
such as increased encouragement of tourism, exchanges with the West, and
discontinued or diminished jamming of Western broadcasts. Some of the
leaders, such as Kadar, see benefits to themselves in accommodating these
pressures. Others, notably Ulbricht, continue to try to repress them.
Page-10
Internal Developments

12. We believe that, barring external shocks, the Communist regimes are
now fairly well established in Eastern Europe. They have developed strong
apparatuses of power, and are able either to anticipate most problems of public
order before they arise or to suppress them if they do. Moreover, the peoples
of these countries for the most part have in the course of some 18 years become
resigned to the continued existence of some form of Communist rule. The
experience of 1956 in Hungary was especially instructive in bringing home
the realization that they could ‘expect little if any help from the West if they
tried themselves to overthrow the Communist authorities,

13. Many problems continue, nonetheless, as potential threats to stability.
General popular dissatisfaction with these regimes and their policies persists.
Living conditions are a major source of discontent, especially in Poland and
Czechoslovakia. Another problem, intellectual agitation for greater freedom
and more contact with the West, has stimulated both popular disaffection and
disagreement within and among the various parties. Indeed, factional differ-
ences continue to plague the Communist parties, and to weaken the positions
of some present leaders. Finally, revived nationalism has in some cases
stimulated these differences, and in others has affected the attitudes and policies
of the Communist leaders themselves.

14. In contrast to the relatively Tosy economic picture in Eastern Europe
during the late fifties, a marked decline has occurred during the early sixties
in rates of economic growth in the more industrially developed countries.
In Czechoslovakia, industrial production actually fell in 1963 and GNP has
scarcely increased at all for two years. There are a number of reasons for
this decline of industrial growth in the northern countries, Industry is being
operated virtually at full capacity, and especially in East Germany there is
no longer a potential for easy growth through the use of existing plant. Except
in Poland there is no longer a surplus of agricultural labor for use in industry.
Foreign and domestic customers are demanding a more rapid improvement
of technology and quality than the economies have been able to achieve under
an inflexible system of economic management. Some temporary factors, such
as grossly unrealistic planning and unfavorable weather conditions, have also
contributed to the slowdown. In most of Eastern Europe agricultural pro-
duction has stagnated, and there has been little improvement in personal
consumption.

15. In Czechoslovakia the serious state of the economy has had important
political effects. Dissatisfaction with Novotny’s mishandling of the economy
has joined with resentment against his slowness and clumsiness in de-Staliniza-
tion. As a result, outspoken criticism of the leadership occurred and demands
were voiced in the press, especially in Slovakia, for justice to Stalinist purge
victims and retribution against the purgers. These developments considerably
sharpened traditional Czech-Slovak antagonism in the party and population,
foreing Novotny to sacrifice some of his closest associates in the leadership

6 T
Page-11
a? ee

 

and to make important political and economic concessions. Indeed, internal
dissension came close last year to unseating Novotny himself. His concessions
have by no means mollified the opposition, which continues to agitate for
less doctrinaire and less restrictive policies. These developments have been
accompanied by an intellectual ferment almost as intense as those in Poland
and Hungary in 1955-1956, and by the re-emergence of nationalist fervor
among Slovaks.

16. In Poland, Gomulka’s popular image has deteriorated greatly since
1956, and he has also lost stature in the Communist Party. Though not nearly
so intense or clearly defined as in 1956-1957, factionalism within the party
has again become an important problem for Gomulka, The conservative or
hard-line group, whose main strength is in the internal security apparatus, is
manifestly out of sympathy with Gomulka’s policies, and for that matter with
Khrushchev’s, which they consider much too “soft.” The opposing faction,
which has representatives in many ministries and among intellectuals, criticizes
Gomulka for failure to get the economy moving and for imposing too many
restrictions on political and social activity. With some justice, this group
charges that the hard-liners are anti-Semitic and desire to restore discredited
Stalinist policies, Further, there is widespread popular impatience with the
failure of the Gomulka regime to achieve the expected improvement in living
conditions, and with increasing restrictions imposed by the regime in daily
life. The continuing conflict between Church and State also imposes strains
within the government and upon the populace.

17. In East Germany, the Ulbricht regime continues to be greatly appre-
hensive of its populace and remains almost completely dependent on Soviet
protection. Ulbricht has been a loyal instrument of Moscow during the
GDR’s entire existence, but his age and health have reached the point where
someone else may shortly have to assume the burdens of his post. None of
the likely candidates appears to possess his skills and experience, and the
Soviets doubtless will be forced to carefully oversee developments during a
succession period. The East German leaders are greatly concerned over the
effect among their own intelligentsia of cultural currents and more liberal
policies elsewhere in Eastern Europe, especially in Czechoslovakia. SED
leaders several times have been moved to express open disapproval of develop-
ments in that country. Such cultural currents are making it more and more
difficult for the Ulbricht regime to continue to suppress kindred developments
in the GDR.

18. In Hungary, Kadar appears to have consolidated his leadership over his
party. At the same time he has placed his country quietly on a gradualist
and pragmatic course which has improved the political and economic climate.
In this he has developed incentives and has encouraged participation in his
internal program on the basis of practical rather than political qualification.
He has even used Hungarian national feeling to his own advantage. In the
process he has lost a good deal of his stigma as a Soviet puppet.

Ss 7
Page-12
SE

19. In Bulgaria, on the other hand, Zhivkov seems largely to have failed
where ‘Kadar has succeeded. Zhivkov’s abilities and his policies are not held
in high regard by important elements in the party which would prefer to be led
by the ousted Stalinist leader, Chervenkov, or the former premier, Yugov.
These elements seize every opportunity (e.g., the Georgiev spy case last winter)
to try to discredit Zhivkov and force a retum to a more conservative line.
Nevertheless, Zhivkov’s position is greatly fortified by demonstrations of strong
Soviet support; his willingness to follow Khrushchev’s lead in both foreign
and domestic policies has been rewarded by the extension of some $600,000,000
in’ Soviet economic aid during the past several months. In any case, the prin-
cipal issues within the Bulgarian party do not now seem to center around the
question of Bulgaria’s relations with the USSR; thus Zhivkov’s removal would
probably not lead to any “declaration of independence” by his successors.

20, While economic growth was slowing down in the northern countries,
Rumania was booming. It achieved an unusually high rate of industrial growth
during 1961-1963, mainly because consistently good harvests since 1958 and the
availability of Western credits enabled the regime to finance greatly increased
imports of industrial materials, machinery, and equipment from the West.
Rumania’s success in industrialization and its acquisition of modern up-to-date
Western equipment increased the confidence of the Communist leaders, en-
couraging them to adopt a nationalistic position, especially in economic policy.

21, The Gheorghiu-Dej regime has until recently been reluctant to relax
its coercive methods of control. Gheorghiu-Dej has long favored strict, even
Stalinist, methods and has opposed the introduction of de-Stalinization in
Rumania, partly because he felt this might undermine his own position. Yet
the revival of nationalism in the past few years has strengthened the unity of
the leadership and has helped the regime to find common ground with the
populace, a process which the recently announced wage increases and tax cuts
should assist. The considerable expansion in contacts and exchanges with
the West has also had an ameliorative effect. Certain measures taken by the
regime—principally the extensive release of political prisoners—suggest that
the regime now feels able to relax its coercive policies toward the populace.

Il, PROSPECTS

Gerieral

22, We believe that the next few years in Eastern Europe will be characterized
by continued change and fluidity. In the political sphere, many regimes prob-
ably will attempt to enlist the support of a larger proportion of the populace.
This would mean further curbs on the police and security organs, continued
sufferance, within limits, of cultural ferment and the exchange of ideas, and
greater toleration of non-Communist participation in public life. Greater leni-
ency in internal policy will encourage, and be encouraged by, the development
of closer cultural and political ties with Western countries. In the economic

8 ET
Page-13
sphere, the regimes probably will tend to be more pragmatically inclined in
their policies than in the past, and to place more reliance on incentives and less
on political exhortation and manipulation. This trend will also be stimulated
by the development of broader economic contacts with the West.

23. Nevertheless, the Communist regimes will still be swayed by the impera-
tives of the Communist system and their relations with the USSR. Some of
them probably will be forced at times to employ harsh methods of control,
and at other times to quicken the pace of economic or political concessions to
the populace. Much will depend on the course of Soviet policy and the USSR’s
relations with the West and Communist China.

24, Generalizations will be more and more difficult to make about Eastern
Europe. With the examples of Yugoslavia, Albania, and now Rumania before
them, other Eastern European regimes can increasingly feel free to approach
their problems in the light of national aspirations and the local political situa-
tion, saving their wholehearted endorsements of Soviet policy for those cases
in which they truly share a common interest with the USSR. Traditional na-
tional antagonisms probably will again become important in relations between
these countries, and between some of them and the USSR. Friction has already
been apparent in relations between the Communist regimes of Hungary and
Rumania over treatment of the Hungarian minority in Transylvania. We think
that other differences of this kind will probably appear between some of these
countries, and between some of them and Yugoslavia.

The Outlook for Political Stability

25. The Communist regimes are probably sufficiently strong and experienced.
to maintain public order. East Germany is the exception; the regime is chronic-
ally unstable, but the strong Soviet forces there are in a position to crush any
disturbances quickly. Since the people are aware of this fact and remember
1953, such disturbances are not likely under present circumstances.

26. While we believe that change in Eastern Europe will be gradual, we do
not exclude the possibility of sudden and even violent shifts, In each country,
the chances of change of this sort depend to some extent upon success in con-
taining popular dissatisfaction and avoiding gross economic mistakes, Even
more important, stability will be endangered if the party proves unable to con-
fine within its own upper circles the factionalism endemic to Communist politics.
The disintegration which threatened the Polish party and overtook the Hun-
garian party in 1956 could proceed only because intraparty divisions came to
involve the rank-and-file membership and the urban population as well. The
Czechoslovak regime is currently experiencing difficulty of this nature, and a
succession problem could intensify this danger in almost any of these countries.
But we believe that, over the next few years, the various regimes will maintain
sufficient unity to preserve essential stability.

27, Equally important will be the influence of developments in the Soviet
Union. If the USSR continues to falter in its military and economic competition

3 9
Page-14
—  W&

with the US, loses further prestige in the contest within the international Com-
munist movement, and gives a continuing impression of uncertainty in its policy
toward Eastern Europe, nationalism will be encouraged to bolder ventures. A
particular threat to stability lies in the prospect of a succession struggle in the
USSR; unless this is avoided or quickly ended, factionalism in Moscow will
almost certainly breed factionalism, nervousness, and exaggerated hopes and
fears in Eastern Europe. This would encourage some Communist leaders to
test more vigorously the limits of Soviet permissiveness. Others, particularly
those whose popular support was narrowest, would try to strengthen domestic
discipline and to reinforce this by a close indentification with the USSR.

28. The Gomulka regime, though still the most permissive in Eastern Europe,
has retrogressed considerably from the degree of freedom which existed in 1956
and 1957, and some further encroachments on the freedom of the Poles are
likely in the next few years. The regime will proceed cautiously, however, since
it is aware that such a course could bring popular resentment to a dangerous
point. The Novotny regime has had to do much to liberalize its internal policies
in the past year or so; we believe that this trend will continue and that the
other regimes will be influenced by it. We also expect the trend toward mod-
eration to continue in Hungary. The Ulbricht regime is unlikely to alter its
fundamental policies, although it may make some gestures, with Soviet encour-
agement, to ease internal pressures.

The Economic Outlook

29. The more industrialized countries of Eastern Europe are unlikely to find
a quick way out of their difficulties. We expect in general that growth rates
of the East European economies will be considerably below the levels achieved
in the 1950's, although above those of 1962-1963. Such an economic performance
is likely to be disappointing to the regimes in most of Eastern Europe and thus
to be a source of contention over economic policy. Pressure will probably in-
crease for giving a higher priority to raising personal consumption and reform-
ing the economic system. In any event, it will take several years before living
conditions in the industrialized countries can be improved markedly, so that
popular impatience and dissatisfaction will probably remain strong.

. 30. We believe that many of these countries will continue to experiment with
reforms of the economic system. Increased reliance probably will be placed
on economic rather than ideological factors in planning, and further attempts
made to simplify state controls, to increase the authority of enterprises in deter-
mining product assortment and methods of production, and to further improve
price systems and incentives. Experiments also probably will be made toward
allowing: consumer demand to determine the assortment of consumer goods pro-
duced, and in making production for export more responsive to foreign demand.
Changes now under consideration in Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Po-
land, for example, are apparently of this nature. Such factors, however, as
prudence, vested bureaucratic interests, and ideological conservatism will limit

10 T
Page-15
2s

the pace of change and produce occasional reversals. The basic characteristics
of central planning, state ownership, and collective agriculture will persist for
a long time to come.

31. We believe that these countries will seek to develop closer economic rela-
tions with the West. The more industrialized countries are making serious
efforts to produce manufactured goods meeting world standards. This is a long-
range effort, but in the interim the developed West is showing an increased
willingness to finance East European trade with credits. Rumania’s special
advantage—a surplus of basic commodities readily salable outside the Bloc—
will depend to some extent on future agricultural conditions. As East European
industry acquires advanced equipment from the West, this will increase de-
pendence on non-Bloc sources for maintenance and new technology.

32. Closer economic ties with the West will probably be accompanied by im-
proved relations in the political and cultural fields, and we expect Western
Europe to be increasingly active in the next few years in attempts to exploit
the changing situation. There are very strong traditional cultural bonds be-
tween many Eastern European peoples and the West, for example, those be-

. tween Rumania and France; a marked revival of these ties would tend to leaven
internal policy and encourage independence of the USSR. The Federal Re-
public is improving trade and cultural relations with these countries and even-
tually may find a formula permitting diplomatic relations. This may help to
mitigate popular fears in Eastern Europe of a “resurgent” and “revanchist” West
Germany, although the critical element here is Bonn’s position with regard to
frontiers. The prospect of improved relations between West Germany and East-
em Europe tends to undermine the position of East Germany. This effect is
already evident in the “Berlin Clause” in recent trade agreements between West
Germany and several Eastern European governments.

Relations Among Communist Couniries

33. We thus believe that, over the next few years, the dominant trend in East-
ern Europe will be toward diversity, toward autonomy within the framework of
loosening Soviet rule. This trend presently benefits from the USSI’s detente
tactics toward the West and the still evolving Sino-Soviet dispute. Future
developments in these spheres may intrude in an important way to check the
processes of change in Eastern Europe. In general, however, we believe that
the factors making for diversity and autonomy have vigorous roots, and that
shifts in Soviet policy are more likely to affect the pace of this process than
to reverse it.

34. As one consequence of this trend, we believe that economic cooperation
among the CEMA countries will continue to develop primarily along bilateral
lines, Rumania’s current stand on this issue, which probably evokes considerable
sympathy elsewhere, makes it unlikely that the Soviets will press broad schemes
of economic integration for the entire area. There is, however, further scope
for mutually advantageous specialization, particularly among the more developed

<x "
Page-16
Jac renimeniergy time re:

countries. In any event, and even though trade with the West will almost
certainly increase, the economies of Eastern Europe will remain closely tied
to that of the USSR. -

35. Rumania’s successful assertion of national interests may stimulate similar
moves by other East European states. For the most part, however, these
regimes are likely to proceed in a circumspect fashion. Rather than openly
differing with Soviet policy, for example, they will tend to press for a greater
voice in the formulation of general Bloc policy prior to Moscow’s official promul-
gations; rather than openly attacking CEMA, they will bargain for increased
Soviet assistance and better terms of trade. Nevertheless, nationalism has on
occasion led to bold and injudicious acts in Eastern Europe, and dramatic con-
flicts can by no means be ruled out in the future.

36. In such instances, the reassertion of Soviet authority would prove a very
difficult matter. Political techniques of control have been much weakened, and
we believe that the Soviets would consider direct military intervention in
Eastern Europe only in emergency circumstances, when they believed vital
Soviet interests to be threatened. In political terms, the irreducible Soviet
demand probably is that these regimes should remain professedly Communist
and continue at least formal membership in the Warsaw Pact. So long as
these limits are not transgressed, we believe that the USSR is prepared to tolerate
considerable divergence in internal policies and even to acquiesce reluctantly
in further manifestations of independence in foreign policy. On other matters
than the Warsaw Pact, perhaps Yugoslavia’s position suggests the political limits
of what the USSR, under sustained pressure, would be willing gradually to
permit to other East European governments.

87. The Soviet strategic stake in Eastern Europe is complex. Soviet forces
stationed there, particularly in East Germany, play an important role in Soviet
strategy for general war, in maintaining stability in East Germany, and in
deterring West Germany from thoughts of reunification by force. The air
defense systems of Eastern Europe are coordinated with the Soviet system and
for most practical purposes constitute an extension of that system; they provide
both additional warning time and active defense against aircraft attacking the
USSR from Western Europe. So long as attack by aircraft from the west can
deliver substantial megatonnage on the USSR, the air defenses of Eastern
Europe will be of great importance to the Soviets. All these concerns might
be reduced by future developments in the German question and European
security arrangements, but a complete Soviet withdrawal from East Germany
could only be undertaken as part of a fundamental change in Soviet policy
toward Central Europe.

38. Within these political and strategic limits, however, the Soviets probably
will have to accommodate themselves to an increasing expression of national
interests in Eastern Europe. In particular, they are likely to acquiesce in a
considerable increase in Eastern Europe’s economic and cultural relations with
the West, including the US. In this matter they will find it difficult to press

12 T
Page-17
ane,

on their allies a more restrictive policy than the USSR itself practices. Thus
we believe that the concern for self-preservation among the Communist regimes
of Eastern Europe will be more important than Soviet misgivings and dis-
pleasure in limiting their economic and cultural relations with the West.

39. The patterns of change in East Europe are bound to be affected by and
in turn to influence the German question. For some time to come the fear
of Germany is likely to be one of Moscow’s strongest cards in Prague and War-
saw. All the Eastern European governments are likely to see little to be
gained from upsetting the status quo in Central Europe. Nevertheless, these
attitudes are not permanently fixed, and they depend to a great degree on the
situation in East and West Germany. Already, the West Germans have opened
new lines of contacts and exchanges that could affect the attitudes of East
Europeans, particularly those less directly concerned with Germany. At the
same time, it is doubtful that East Germany can safely afford to follow the
trends toward nationalism and liberalization of internal controls developing else-
where in East Europe. It is thus conceivable that the difficulties arising from
East Germany’s anomalous position in Europe will become increasingly im-
portant both to the USSR and to the other Communist countries. Though other
factors will be of great importance, such an evolution of attitudes is one of the
developments which might lead to a Soviet re-evaluation of its German policy.
Page-18
€: Asiistant” Chief of Staff for Intelligence, D
“Department of the Army se
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligenc:

Navy . Flas
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department ‘of the Air 3

Force

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the ixaiional Security Agency .
i. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department -or
, Agency :

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
licable sécurity regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence “Agency ‘by.

   

2), for the:

 

 

 

   

arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain

it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of. the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with [AC-D-69/2, 22

. June 195 2

-. White House”
National Security Council
Department of State

~ Department of Defense

Atomic Energy, Commission
> - Federal Bureau of Investigation