
Page-72
BUE 10-68
4 October 1952

 

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 10-68

Communist Military Assistance Programs
in Less Developed Areas

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM

_ RELEASE IN FULL
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf
4 October 1968

Authenticated:
xt SECRETARY, “a

CONFROWLED_DISSEM, N? 349
Page-73
inielligence organizations 5

 

estimate:

The Central Inielligence A

menis of State and Di

acy ond the
ense, the NSA.

 
    

Concurring:

Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, the Deputy Dir

 

» Central ir

 

Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Dir
of State

 

or of Intelligence aad

 

Vice Adm. Vernon L. Lowrance, for the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Ut. Gen, Marshall S. Carter, the Director, Nat

 

ional Security Agency

 

Abstaining:

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Cori-
mission ond Mr. William ©. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

 

     
  

This material contains information affecti
within the meaning of the espionage la:
mission or revelation of which in any gflanner

National Defense of the United States
le 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
an unauthorized person is prohibited.
Page-74
“RENE ARS Obs

; r appr 2 xelease through

SRMRET the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of
the Central Intelligence Agency.

Date Je 4/4
we

COMMUNIST MILITARY ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMS IN LESS DEVELOPED
AREAS _

CONCLUSIONS

A. Since 1955, the Soviet Union, China, and several East European
states have, among them, extended roughly $5.7 billion in arms aid to
22 non-Communist countries in Asia and Africa. The Soviets have
provided about 90 percent of this total; the Chinese less than 2 percent.

B. The Soviets‘ clearly consider military aid as a valuable instru-
ment of policy. It is used to build positions of influence at the expense
of the West, sometimes to undercut the Chinese, and to improve oppor-
tunities for access by Soviet forces, when desired, to ports, airfields,
and other facilities.

C. In pursuing these objectives, the Soviets have encountered
both success and failure. Partly as a consequence of military aid
programs, Wester influence has been eroded in many countries, and
Moscow has won significant positions of influence in several important
areas, notably the Middle East. Military aid has not, however, pro-
vided Moscow with strong or dependable control over client states
or improved the fortunes of local Communist parties.

D. Conflict and instability in the Third World during the years
ahead will probably provide the USSR with additional opportunities
to dispense military aid. Since the Soviets have come to regard deal-
ing in arms as one of the more effective instruments of their foreign
policy, they are likely to continue to take up such opportunities. We
doubt, however, that in the next several years these will be numerous
or important enough to result in aid extensions at the high levels of

the early 1960's.
offer 1
Page-75
sigfer

DISCUSSION

|. THE PATTERN OF COMMUNIST MILITARY AID PROGRAMS

1. Over the past dozen years or so the USSR, Communist China, and several
Communist states of Eastern Europe have extended some $5.7 billion in mili-
tary aid to 22 non-Communist countries of Asia and Africa.’ The overwhelming

“portion of this, about 90 percent, has been provided by the Soviet Union. Most
of the recipients are former clients or .colonies of the Western nations. Gen-
erally they are ruled by authoritarian regimes whose stability depends largely
on national military forces, and they face major problems related to economic
development and political stability. None possesses a technological and in-
dustrial base adequate to develop and supply its armed forces with the types
of modern weapons they think they need.

A. The Soviet Role and Aims

2. The USSR is a relative newcomer to international arms trade; Western
Powers had dominated the field before the Soviets initiated a program of their
own. Under Stalin, the USSR’s postwar policy gave priority to rebuilding
the domestic economy and to consolidating the Soviet position in Eastern ,
Europe. Moreover, Stalin’s policy of supporting local Communist parties
in the Free World apparently excluded the possibility of dealing with nationalist
regimes, however anticolonialist. Following Stalin’s death, however, the Soviet
leadership radically altered its approach toward these political movements,
abandoned its policy of lending support only to ideological clients, and inau-
gurated military and economic aid programs to non-Communist countries. This
decision was probably facilitated by a number of factors: the general success
of the USSR’s postwar economic recovery effort; the availability of surplus
arms as a consequence of military manpower reductions and changes in military
doctrine during the mid-1950's; and the notable lack of success of indigenous
Communist forces in many developing areas.

3. The new Soviet approach found its first expression in 1955 when the USSR,
initially using Czechoslovakia as an intermediary, began arms shipments to
Egypt. Over the years, the USSR has extended some $5 billion in military aid
to countries of the Third World. About half has gone to two countries, the
UAR and Indonesia. Five others, Iraq, India, Syria, Afghanistan, and Algeria
have received about 45 percent of the total, with the remainder going in small
chunks to a number of states, primarily in Africa. The Soviets have usually
offered liberal terms: flexible repayment arrangements, discount prices for the
most part, and outright grants in a few cases,

* This estimate deals with Communist military assistance to the countries of the Third World,
It does not discuss Soviet and other aid programs to Communist states (e.g., North Vietnam,
Cuba). See Table at Annex for quantities supplied to various recipients.

2 syfer
Page-76
4. Soviet military assistance is an important element of Soviet policy designed
to increase Soviet (and decrease US) influence. It is often used as a means to
gain entree into states which might otherwise be less susceptible to Soviet
approaches. It sometimes helps to align “progressive” forces with Soviet foreign
policy, and, occasionally, to maintain regimes in power favorable to the USSR.
Moscow has in recent years also used its military aid program to pursue the
additional objective of attempting to prevent the Chinese from extending their
influence. In pursuit of such goals, the Soviets have not, as far as we know,
turned down a single prospective client seeking their assistance, and have
‘repeatedly shown that they. can move rapidly to exploit new opportunities.
They have, however, displayed some selectivity in setting terms and in deter-
mining the kinds and quantities of arms they will sell. In most cases, the Clients
themselves originally preferred other sources of supply, turning to the Soviets
only after failing to get what they wanted elsewhere. And gradually, fears
associated with taking arms from the Communist states have greatly diminished
throughout the Third World.

5. The fact that Soviet arms offers have been made in widely dispersed areas
suggests that military aid policy is not designed to implement a rigid plan, but
to respond to opportunities, wherever they arise, to establish influence and pres-
ence. The opportunities which drew the Soviets into this activity in the mid-1950's
were in the Middle East and thus could be viewed in the light of traditional
Russian strategic interests. At the time, the Soviets evidently thought that they
had reason to be concerned about the political-military position the US was estab-
lishing on the USSR’s southern periphery, and their moves in that region were
surely thought of as a counter to the US presence.

6. The USSR's use of military aid as one of the major tools of its diplomacy
probably reflects its recognition that in most developing countries the military is
either the actual or potential locus of power. The military establishment of the
recipient country is the direct beneficiary of this aid and stands to gain most
from it, and the Soviets have generally sought to encourage contact and rapport
with military leaders. This has been facilitated by the presence of Soviet tech-
nical advisers, by the training of the recipient country’s military personnel in the
USSR, and by periodic exchange visits of high level military delegations.?

7. The Soviets have not used their aid programs to bargain for formal base
rights. Generally, they‘appear to consider such arrangements as politically dis-
advantageous. They have acquired, however, the use of fuel storage facilities at
Port Said and naval repair facilities at Alexandria to support their Mediterranean
fleet operations. And recently, they also appear to have acquired managerial con-
trol of the Al-Kabbari ship construction and repair facility at Alexandria which is
to build vessels for Soviet account. There is evidence, moreover, that they have
staged combined air and naval intelligence operations using Egyptian facilities.

*Since the start of their program, the Soviets have trained about 21,000 military personnel
from the developing countries in the USSR. In recent years, the number of Soviet military
advisory personnel serving in the recipient countries has averaged some 3,500 annually.

RET 3
Page-77
Similar limited arrangement might be made elsewhere, as a peacetime conven-
ience, but it is unlikely that present Soviet war plans contemplate extensive
reliance on foreign facilities. To the extent that they have military interests in a
recipient country, the Soviets’ aims appear to be: to prevent military cooperation
with the West; to seek the use of the recipient as a proxy for various initiatives
against Western interests; and to improve opportunities for access by Soviet forces,
when desired, to ports, airfields, and other facilities.

. B. The Role of the East European Countries

8. The military aid programs of Communist countries of Easter Europe
have been modest and are likely to remain so for some time to come. Of the
$629 million in arms aid extended to the developing countries to date, nearly
three-quarters was provided during the years 1955-1958, when East European
countries were acting as intermediaries for the USSR. Since then, East European
arms commitments have been considerably reduced, averaging some $15-$20
million annually. Even so, there is evidence that various East European countries
have occasionally complained about having to participate in the Soviet military
assistance program.

9. The major East European suppliers have been Czechoslovakia and Poland;
the other Communist regimes have provided only token aid. The primary recipi-
ents have been Moscow’s major clients, the Arab countries and Indonesia, and to
a lesser extent, India and Afghanistan. Unlike the Soviets, the East European
regimes, especially Czechoslovakia, have in recent years been interested in arms
sales primarily for commercial reasons. Consequently, their credit terms have
been more stringent than those offered by the USSR; they have insisted on
shorter repayment periods, payment in hard currency, and have given no dis-
count from list prices.

C. The Minor Chinese Role

10. Since 1958, the Chinese have extended some $88 million in arms aid to the
developing countries, probably much of it in the form of outright grants. This
represents less than 2 percent of the military aid granted by all Communist states
to Third World countries. Though the objectives of the Chinese aid program are
broad—to build positions of influence at the expense of both the West and the
USSR—the means available to the Chinese are limited, and‘ théir targets of
opportunity have become fewer. Over the past decade, the Chinese have pro-
vided sizable amounts of arms to only 5 non-Communist countries: Algeria (be-
fore independence), Cambodia, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Tanzania. In addition,
the Chinese have extended token assistance, primarily small arms, ammunition,
and training, to several African countries and to dissident political groups in Africa
and Asia.

ll. The Chinese have to date achieved little of substance with their military
aid programs. Their temporary success in Indonesia was almost entirely the
result of Sukarno’s excellent political rapport with the Peking leadership; since

4 oy
Page-78
segfer

Sukamo’s downfall, the Chinese have lost not only their arms investment but
whatever influence they once had. Pakistan, which has received almost half of
China's military aid, has recently shown a willingness to incur Chinese displeasure
by seeking Soviet aid. Failures and partial setbacks are not likely to dissuade
the Chinese from continuing with their military aid program, though still on a
modest scale.

ll. THE IMPACT OF MILITARY AID

12. In reviewing the record to date, the Soviets probably regard it—as we
do—as one of uneven achievement. To be sure, Western influence has been
eroded in many countries; the Soviets have gained significant positions of in-
fluence in important areas—e.g., the Middle East—where they were not pre-
viously present; and in some instances, the Soviets can count on the support of
their clients, particularly with respect to some issues which evoke international
controversy. For instance, the USSR’s intervention in Czechoslovakia was un-
equivocally denounced by only two Soviet arms recipients, Tanzania and Uganda.
Other governments, more dependent on Soviet arms, stood silent or expressed
their disapproval of the Soviet move in very muted terms. On the other hand,
the military aid relationship has not provided the Soviets with strong or depend-
able control over clients, and the fortunes of local Communists have rarely im-
proved as a result of an increased Soviet presence. Moreover, as a result of the
Arab-Israeli war of 1967, they learned that a special relationship with military
aid recipients can lead to risks of unwanted military involvement, possibly even
direct confrontation with the US; diplomatic and prestige losses as a result of the
defeat of their clients and the destruction of Soviet-supplied equipment; and the
cost of replacing lost equipment and restoring a damaged relationship.

13. How much durable leverage the Soviets have gained in any particular
area is, of course, difficult to measure. Still more difficult to ascertain is how
much of any such gain can be attributed to arms shipments and how much to
larger political considerations. Indonesia under Sukarno, for example, was a
major recipient of Soviet arms and maintained good relations with the Soviets,
but nonetheless went on to pursue foreign policies much more in line with Peking
than Moscow. The Arabs have been more cooperative with the USSR on inter-
national issues, but they too before June 1967 periodically criticized Moscow
for its foreign policies and for meddling in their affairs. India has many times
deferred to the Soviets, but primarily because it counts on Soviet support against
China. In general, the Soviets have been careful not to abuse the leverage
afforded them through arms aid, and only very occasionally have they tried to use
it to exact political concessions.

14. The Soviet military aid program has generated closer trade and economic
relations with most of the recipients. Aid provisions frequently have called for
repayment in commodities rather than hard currency, and this in tum has resulted
in some trade reorientation from traditional markets to the USSR. The impact
of Soviet arms aid on the economies of most aid recipients, however, has been
Page-79
safer

comparatively modest, partly because of the terms associated with the aid and
partly because of the limited payments thus far made. Roughly two-thirds of
the credits extended by Moscow remain unpaid, and the Soviets probably expect
in the end to write off much of this. In the meantime, they can perhaps win some
additional political return by generous debt rescheduling. In any event, the
existing indebtedness has not inhibited the USSR or its clients from entering
additional arms agreements.

15. The Soviets may expect that by cultivating members of the recipient coun-
try’s military establishment they can in time have major influence on the political
orientation of the recipient, its policies; and perhaps even the choice of a suc-
cessor regime. Any such expectations, however, are supported by few tangible
successes. In fact, the Soviets have met with outright failures in several important
instances. In Ghana, some of the military were fairly cooperative with Moscow
for a time, but eventually turned out both the Soviets and Nkrumah. In Indo-
nesia, the military was never very responsive to the Soviets despite its almost
total dependence on them for arms. And in the UAR, the USSR continues to
provide arms to a military establishment for whose political orientation, as well
as professional quality, it appears to have no very high regard.

16. The Soviets probably never thought of military aid as an instrument which
by itself could effect the revolutionary transformation they would like to see in
Third World countries. Their experience of the last decade must confirm that
an arms supply relationship gives no decisive influence over political developments
within recipient countries. The internal politics of some recipients have been
highly volatile. If anything, the Soviets are nowadays more cautious about using
military aid as a way of becoming directly involved in internal affairs, with all the
obligations and risks flowing from such attempts. If military aid buys influence,
and, in particular, leverage on a recipient's foreign policy, the Soviets will think
they have made a good bargain.

Ill, PROSPECTS

17. The Soviets almost certainly intend to continue their military aid pro-
grams, which they must consider to have proved a useful tool of policy, and
whose costs are relatively insignificant in terms of the USSR’s resources. (The
value of Soviet arms shipments to the developing countries last year was less
than one percent of the USSR’s defense budget.) The Soviets still appear to be
willing to provide military aid wherever there is an opportunity to advance their
interests or to establish their influence in new areas. They have recently agreed
to furnish arms to South Yemen, Pakistan, and the Sudan, and have made offers
to Jordan and Ethiopia. The uncertainties of domestic and regional politics in
Africa will probably provide the Soviets with additional opportunities over the
next several years. In Latin America, an area so far denied the Soviets, they may
be expected to make limited arms offers, though the prospect of finding clients
there seems rather remote.

6 S| egfer
Page-80
ofc

18. The Soviets will, we believe, place growing emphasis on certain geopolitical
aspects of their military aid program. Over the years, they have devoted a large
proportion of their arms effort to the countries along the USSR’s southern perim-
eters. From the Soviet viewpoint, entry into some of those countries is made the
more attractive since a few are members of Westem alliances. Iran now receives
Soviet arms, Pakistan may soon. The extension of arms offers to Pakistan, which
has periodically been in conflict with two other Soviet recipients, Afghanistan and
India, suggests that Moscow is willing to risk antagonizing other clients, and

“even to some extent involvement in regional disputes, if the political gains of so
doing (in this instance the reduction of US and Chinese influence in an area near
the USSR) appear especially promising.

19. By developing air and port arrangements with some recipients of their
military aid, the Soviets have succeeded in providing support for their military
presence in the Mediterranean and Red Sea areas. Such arrangements have a
significant potential for further development and use. Ethiopia, Libya, Jordan,
and Saudi Arabia, which have cooperated with the US and refused to except
Soviet military aid or collaboration, have shown increasing concem over these
developments and the pressures which they create.

20. A larger proportion of the military items which the Soviets furnish over
the next several years will probably be relatively sophisticated equipment. The
assortment of advanced conventional weapons (e.g., Mig-21 and SU-7 fighters,
TU-16 medium-range bombers, guided missile patrol boats, and surface-to-air
missiles) available to some existing clients will probably be made available to
other recipients. About two-thirds of the weapons delivered by the Soviets to
date are in standard use in the armed forces of the communist countries; more
than half are being currently manufactured in the USSR. By contrast, until
1961, the Soviets generally supplied arms that were outdated by their standard.

21. Clearly, the costs of the Soviet arms program have increased in recent
years, and may mount if the Soviets satisfy demands for more sophisticated
weapons. We think it unlikely, however, that the USSR will be dispensing aid
on the record scale of the early 1960's. The process of replacing the obsolescent
equipment of existing clients is a gradual one. Moreover, the states that seem
to be the most likely new clients of the USSR over the next year or two are
small for the most part, and have limited needs for arms. Regional conflict
involving a major Soviet client could, of course, result in appreciable increases
in supply activity, as did the Arab-Israeli war last year.

22. The instability and conflict which are likely to characterize the Third
World during the years ahead will provide the Soviets with additional opportun-
ities. The reluctance of most Western Powers to provide arms, coupled with the
competitive desire of many of the developing nations to obtain them, add up to
a favorable arms market for the Soviets. Not all the various conflict situations
will be exploitable by the USSR. Some, however, will be. Thus, we believe
that the Soviets will continue to provide military assistance to a fairly large
number of noncommunist countries.
Page-81
offs

23. A major change in the Soviet approach to East-West relations and the
adoption of regional arms control agreements affecting the Third World would,
of course, alter this judgment. Neither appears to be in sight. For some time,
Soviet policy is likely to be based on the premise that the Third World constitutes
a theater of competition between Soviet and Western influence, and that arms
supply is one of the important instruments for waging that struggle. There may
be areas, e.g., the Middle East, where the Soviets might think it prudent to seek
tacit understanding to limit the intensity of competitive arming. But it seems
unlikely that they will wish to join formally with the US in an effort to limit
the quantities of arms acquired by less developed countries.

8 SEGRET
Page-82
\

ANNEX

COMMUNIST MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO THE LESS

DEVELOPED COUNTRIES, BY RECIPIENT,

1955-JUNE 1968°

 

  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 

 

 

Recipient TOTAL
Afghanistan ..... 359
Algeria 248
Cambodia .... 20
Congo (Brazzaville) 2
Cyprus 29
Ghana .. 10
Guinea 1L
India . - 643
Indonesia - 1336
Tran . 110
Iraq . 675
Mali .. 4
Morocco - 33
Pakistan 40
Somalia .. 35
South Yemen . na.
Sudan 20
Syria 457
Tanzania 9
Uganda .. .
United Arab Republic . . 1,549
Yemen - 98
TOTAL ......- 62-02 e eee ee eee 5,700

USSR

346
235
12

 

Million US $
Eastern Communist
Europe China

13 _
L 12
— 8
1 _

1 _—

48 _
199 21
22 —
20 —
_- 40
55 —
_- 7
2 _
239 _-
28 —
629 88

"In addition, through 1967, the USSR made cash sales of military equipment to
India ($102 million), Indonesia ($11 million), and Nigeria ($5 million); the East
European countries have made cash sales to Afghanistan ($3 million), India ($6
million), Indonesia ($19 million), Nigeria ($2 million), Syria ($2 million), the
UAR ($50 million), and Yemen ($3 million).

SE
Page-83
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence ond Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. ‘Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Director of Central Reference Service, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Central Reference Service, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not ih excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document ‘should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4, The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-84
seer
Page-85
COHNFROHES-BISSEM