
Page-1
2

roR. ”
CON’ DISSEM

SITIVE SNIE 10-9 -65

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM Oy ley hoes
RELEASE IN FULL

SPECIAL NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

COMMUNIST AND FREE WORLD REACTIONS
TO A POSSIBLE US COURSE OF ACTION

This is the estimate. No further versions will be published.

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARC

as indicated overleaf
23 July 1965

ese tel. CZ sed OE 7 .
fe" ZS A ey 1988
Page-2
Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, Defense, AEC and NSA.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 23 July 1965. Concurring were the Director of
Intelligence and Research, Department of State; the Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency; the Atomic Energy Commission
Representative to the USIB; and the Director of the National
Security Agency. The Assistant to the Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside
of his jurisdiction.

CLASSIFICATION OF TITLE IS SE@RET"
WHEN USED SEPARATELY

WARNING
the National Defeg
Page-3
ae

perbestee

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

23 July 1965

SNIE 10-9-65: COMMUNIST AND FREE WORLD REACTIONS TO A
POSSIBLE US COURSE OF ACTION

THE PROBLEM

To estimate foreign reactions, particularly those of the
Communist powers, to a specified US course of action with

respect to Victnan.

ASSUMPTIONS

For purposes of this estimate, we assume that the US decides
to increase its forces in South Vietnam to about 175,000 by
1 November. We further assume related decisions to call up
about 225,000 reserves, to extend tours of duty at the rate of
20,000 a month, to increase the regular strength of the armed

services by 400,000 over the next year, and to double draft calls.

Beer S-E-CBe-T
Page-4
BeeeP ‘gent
§) E

We further assume (a) that the increase in forces would be
accompanied by statements reiterating our objectives and our
readiness for unconditional discussions, (b) that US forces would
be deployed so that no major grouping threatened or appeared to
threaten the 17th Parallel, and (c) that we might either continue
present policy with regard to air strikes or extend these strikes
in North Vietnam to include attacks on land (but not sea) lines
of communication from South China* and military targets in the

Hanoi-Haiphong area.

THE ESTIMATE

1. Communists and non-Communists alike would see in the
increased US military involvement in Vietnam a strong indication
that the US saw little hope of early negotiations. This would be
particularly true if, at the same time, the US extended its air

operations in North Vietnan.

 

* See Annex for a discussion and map of both land and
current sea routes from China to North Vietnan.
Page-5
er S-E-C =

I. VIET CONG AND DRV REACTIONS

2. At present the Viet Cong (VC) and North Vietnamese (DRV)
leaders appear confident that their course in South Vietnam
promises ultimate and possibly early success without important
concessions on their part. They seem to believe that they can
achieve a series of local military successes which, sooner or later,
will bring victory through a combination of a deteriorating South
Vietnamese army (ARVN) morale and effectiveness, a collapse of
anti-Commnist government in Saigon, and an exhaustion of the US

will to persist.

3. We do not believe that inauguration of the US actions
here assumed would basically alter these expectations. The VC
and the DRV probably have come to expect increased US commit-
ments, and they probably believe that the VC, with increased
North Vietnamese assistance, can find ways to offset the effect
of larger US forces. Nor do we think that the extergion of air

attacks to military targets in the Hanoi and Haiphong area would

significantly injure the VC ability to persevere in the South
Page-6
we ; AERP 8-E-C

 

or persuade the Hanoi Goverrment that the price of persisting

was unacceptably high.*

4, If the extension of air attacks were to include sustained
interdiction of land lines of cormmnication leading from South
China, these actions would obviously make the delivery of Soviet
and Chinese aid more difficult and costly, and would have a

* The Aséistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, disagrees
with the judgment wade in this paragraph and would substitute
the following: "3. We believe that inauguration of the US
actions here assumed, which emphasize US willingness and
determination to become more deeply involved in combat
operations in the South and eliminate the concept of an
area ‘sanctuary’ in North Victnan, has a rcusonable chance
of basically altering the Commnists' short-term expectations.
While the VC and the DRV probably have come to expect sone
additional US commitments, and they probably believe that
the VC, with increased North Vietnamese assistance, can find
ways to offset the effect of larger US forces, such confidence
could be quite quickly undermined by effectively expanded US
combat operations. Extension of air attacks to military
targets in the Hanoi and Haiphong arces would pose the added
threat that urban/industrial targets might be next. The
selective and linited nature of US bonbing target selectims
to date may have led Hanoi seriously to underestimate the ex-
tent of US determination to exert the power necessary to force
discontinuance of DRV support for the VC. US military actions
resulting from the assumed program could well persuade the
Hanoi Government that the price of persisting was becoming
unacceptably high."
Page-7
serious impact on the limited industrial sector of the DRV
general economy. It would still not have a critical impact
on the Communist determination to persevere and would not, at
least for the short tem, seriously impair VC capabilities in

South Vietnan.

5. If, in addition, POL targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong area
were destroyed by air attacks, the DRV's ability to provide trans-
potation for the general economy would be severely reduced. It
would also complicate their military logistics. If additional
PAVN forces were employed in South Vietnam on a scale sufficient
to counter increased US troop strength, this would substantially
increase the amount of supplies needed in the South. The VC also
depend on supplies from the North to maintain their present level
of large-scale operations. The accumulated strains of a prolonged
curtailment of supplies received from North Vietnam would obviously
have an impact on the Communist effort in the South. They would
certainly inhibit and might even prevent an increase in large-scale
VC military activity, though they would probably not force any
significant reduction in VC terrorist tactics of harassment and
sabotage. These strains, particularly if they produced a serious
check in the development of VC capabilities for large-scale

(multi-battalion) operations might lead the DRV to consider

-5-

AREEP  S-E-C-)
Page-8
negotiations.* But the final decision on whether to seek
negotiations would depend to a great extent on political
developments in the Indochina area and elsewhere, and on the

actual course of combat in South Vietnam.

6. In response to the US program, the Communists would
almost certainly undertake measures to increase their own

strength in South Vietnam for a higher level of struggle. They

are already augmenting VC units and dispatching additional PAVN

forces to South Vietnam; the assumed US actions would probably

result in a speeding up of this process. By the end of 1965,

the total of PAVN regulars in organized units in South Vietnam

could reach 20,000 to 30,000 men. Although the Communists are

aware of the dangers of concentrating their troops in large
numbers, they might, during the next few months, attempt major
assaults against GVN forces and positions, seeking to shatter

ARVN before the increased weight of US strength could be brought

to bear.

* The Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department
of State, and the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army, believe that in spite of greater damage
and harassment caused by sustained air attack on lines of
communication (LOC) and other targets, the capacities of DRV
and Laos LOC are. sufficient to permit support of the war in
South Vietnam at the scale envisaged in this estimate. Other
significant factors supporting this position are the impossi-
bility of doing irreparable damage to LOC capacity; demonstrated
Communist logistic resourcefulness and ability to move large
amounts of war material long distances over difficult terrain

by primitive means; and the difficulty of detecting, let alone
stopping, sea infiltration.

-~6-

~—Pee=B®_ S-E-
Page-9
Ee S-
TIVE

T In coping with larger US forces employed in a more
aggressive fashion, we believe that the Viet Cong would scek to
avoid the kind of engagements which risked a serious Communist
defeat. Instcad, they would probably concentrate on harassments
intended to bleed and humiliate US forces, trapping and destroy-
ing isolated units where possible. At oa minimum, the Communists
would almost certainly continue present efforts to cut land
communication lines and would step up the dispatch of small,
expendable teams on sabotage and assassination missions designed
to make the US look impotent or foolish. The Communists might

also seek to increase their activities in Laos.

8. Over the longer run, the Communists' strategy will
depend upon the actual course of combat and their estimates of
South Vietnamese stability and US will to persist. They are
predisposed to attach grcat weight to signs of disintegration
in Saigon and to manifestations of domestic US opposition to
Administration policies. These boost popular morale on the
Comunist side and reinforce the leadership's conviction that

Communist staying powcr is inherently superior.

9. Should future military and political developments

bring this conviction into serious doubt, the DRV might express

-7-

a=rP 5S-E- =
ITIVE
Page-10
eee SES

increased interest in negotiations. However, they would endeavor
to preserve their owm freedom of action while loying inhibitions
on US/GVN military operations, hoping to promote disarray in

Saigon and encourage US opinion in favor of withdrawal.

10. Faced with the buildup outlincd in our assumptions,
the DRV would probably request more oir defense equipment fron
the USSR, including SAMs, fighters, technicians, and perhaps
pilots, particularly if US oir attacks were expanded. From the
Chinese, Hanoi would probably request more radar equipment, anti-
aircraft artillery, and technicians in addition to o further
increase in shipments of infantry arms and ammunition. Hanoi
might also request China (ona, perhaps, North Korea) to furnish
aircraft and pilots. In general, however, we believe that Hanoi
would wish to maintain some limits on, ond a rough balance

between, Soviet and Chinese personnel.

11. Deployments on the scale here assumed would cause the
DRV some concern about US invasion. This would be true even if
US forces took up positions which were not suggestive of an
invasion. We believe, however, that the DRV would not react to
this concern by requesting the introduction of Chinese combat
forces. It probably would make such a request only if actual

invasion scemed clearly imminent.

-8.-

“ee
Page-11
Bowe SB tebe

II. CHINESE CCMMUNIST REACTIONS

12. The Chinese are probably even more convinced than the
Vietnamese Communists thot if the DRV/VC romain firm, in the end
the US will be wholly defeated in Vietnam. Renewed US determina-
tion, evidenced by the buildup assumed in this estimate, would
give the Chinese some pause but, in our view, not much. They
would believe that the US measures were sufficient only to

postpone defeat while magnifying its eventual effect.

13. We do not belicve that the Chinese would react to the
assumed US moves including the present level of air attacks, by
overtly intervening in the military struggle with combat forces.
They are already stepping up their military assistance, including
the introduction of some rear service elements into North Vietnam,
and would give more aid if requested by the DRV. Moreover,
they would try to increase alarm among non-Communists, especially
the US public, by intensifying their propaganda and reiterating
their willingness to accept hostilities if attacked by the US.
They would probably continue to strengthen their forces in South

China and might take some further overt steps toward mobilization.

“Bee S-E-Cy
Page-12
—bee-P S-E-'

14, If oir strikes were extended to the Hanoi-Haiphong area
and particularly to lines of communicetion from South China, the
chances of Chinese Communist air intervention from Chinese bases
would increase. This would particularly be true if the air strikes
were effective in cutting the main roads and rail lines over which
the principal supplies are moving. While we believe the Chinese
would be reluctant to engage the US in an air war or to risk US
retaliation against Chinese military installations, we consider
the chances are about even that Chinese aircraft would deliberately
engage the US over North Vietnam from bases within China. We do
not believe, however, that this would lead to greatly increased
Chinese Communist participation in the conflict. In any case, if
large numbers of US aircraft were operating close to the frontiers

*
of China the likelihood of hostile encounters would be high.

15. If, in the circumstances described in paragraph 9, the
Viet Cong and the DRV at some point wished to move toward negoti-
ations, on important divergence might open up between Hanoi and
Peiping. The Chinese are themselves not suffering direct military
damage and they fear that negotiations would give the USSR a
chance to increase its role in Vietnam. Thus they would exert
strong pressures to dissuade the DRV from entering into negotiations.

* Footnotes of dissent from this paragraph appear on the next page.

-10-

Shee
Page-13
esp S-E-

 

 

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; Assistant
Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence); Assistant Chief of
Staff, Intelligence, USAF; and the Director of NSA, do not
agree with the judgment expressed in this paragraph. They
believe that it should read as follows: “If air strikes
were extended to the Hanoi-Haiphong area and particularly
to lines of communication from South China, the chances

of Chinese Communist air intervention from Chinese bases
would increase. Nevertheless, we believe the Chinese would
be reluctant to engage the US in an air war or to risk US
retaliation against Chinese military installations. We
therefore consider it unlikely that Chinese aircraft would
deliberately engage the US over North Vietnam from bases
within China."

The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of
State, believes that the chances are better than even that
Chinese aircraft would deliberately engage the US under
these circumstances. Even if air engagements were accidental
they would have extremely dangerous repercussions and if
they were deliberate they could not fail to lead toa

wider war.

- 10a -

See =S-E-
Page-14
Sr s-

III. SOVIET REACTIONS

16. The USSR hopes for an eventual Communist victory in South
Vietnam, but it is more conscious than Peiping and Hanoi of the
larger military risks. Moreover, the USSR wants to maintain or
improve its influence over the DRV and in the world Communist
movement generally; it docs not wish the kind of Communist victory
which would magnify the prestige and power of China. Unlike
Peiping and Hanoi, Moscow is concerned with minimizing damage to
East-West relations. In this situation, the USSR prefers a
course of negotiations,but it cannot afford to appear laggard in
supporting the DRV, and it is deepening its commitment to

Honoi's cause.

17. %In the circumstances outlined in ovr assumptions, we
believe that the USSR would see no alternative to continued support
of the DRV and further expansion of its military aid. It would
thus be likely to grant a DRV request for additional air defense
equipment and personnel. It would probably feel compelled to
comply promptly with DRV requests to replace air defense equipment
destroyed by US attacks in the Hanoi area. The Soviet aid pro-

grom might be hampered by Chinese restrictions on transit rights.

-ll-

age all
Page-15
ete

18. The USSR would probably indicate that, if the US remains
unyielding in Victnam, it faces trouble elsewhere in the world, as,
for example, in Berlin. We do not think, however, that Moscow
would confront us with a major challenge. Nor jo we believe that
the Soviets would wish to foreclose the possibility of negotiations
at some future stage; indeed, they would probably work to keep

this possibility olive on both sides.

19. We believe that the US decisions considered here would
produce important reactions in general Soviet policy. Moscow
would almost certainly harden its general stance toward the US.
For example, although the Soviets have agreed to renewed disarma-
ment talks, partly in order to check the deterioration in East-
West relations, the assumed US course in Vietnam would probably
iead them to devote the talks entirely to attacks on the US or

even to break them off.

20. The assumed moves would carry total US military man-
Power above the 2.8-2.9 million total which we estimate for the
USSR; they would also imply a reversal of the downward trend in US
military spending which Kosygin cited in justifying the 1965

reduction in the overt Soviet military budget. We believe that
Page-16
Sep 5S-E-

 

the USSR's declared policy of restraining or even reducing mili-
tary expenditures has been under attack by military spokesmen in
recent months ond is the subject of debate within the collective
leadership. It is likely that the US moves, plus the worsening of
general Sovict-US relations, would strengthen the position of
those arguing for additional military appropriations. In these
circumstances, the USSR probably would respond with an overt

increase in its own military spending.

IV. NON-COMMUNIST REACTIONS

21. Most non-Communist nations have already realized that the
US, already heavily engaged in South Vietnom, is likely to increase
its commitment if necessary. The measures here considered would
nevertheless cause rising alarm because, in combination with
Communist statements in response, they would revive and fortify
fears of increased cold-war tensions and even of o much larger
war. This might make some governments more reluctant to give public
support to US policy, particularly governments in political diffi-
culty, e.g., the UK, Canoda, and Norwoy. Significant extension of
bombing in North Vietnam would increase apprehension in these
countries. Over the longer run, however, the more important re-

actions will depend on the subsequent course of the conflict.

-13-

BAP S-E-Cy
Page-17
ste

22. In non-Commnist Asia, Japan offers the most serious
problem. We believe the Sato government would maintain its
policy of supporting US policy in spite of howls from the press
and opposition forces. Sato's position would be made much more
difficult, however, if Okinawa or especially Japan were to
become a greatly expanded conduit for support of US forces in
Vietnam, or if it appeared that China vas about to become
involved in the fighting. India would deplore increased bombing
of the DRV but would otherwise continue its position of public
questioning and private acquiescence in US actions in South
Vietnam. Pakistan, hoping to continue to receive American aid
while remaining on good terms with China, would reaffirm its

neutrality and its noninvolvement in Vietnam.

V. REACTIONS TO THE MODE OF ANNOUNCEMENT

23. If the announcements were made in piecemeal fashion and
with no more high level emphasis than necessary, the development
of a crisis atmosphere might be mitigated. It is also possible
that private assurances to the USSR that the US increase in
overall military strength was directed solely toward the situation

in Vietnam, and not meant to improve the US position vis-a-vis

-Wm-
Page-18
co 5S-E-

the Soviets, might soften the tone of the Soviet response. This
avoidence of strident recriminetions might in turn decrease some-
what the negative reaction of non-Communist countries. We
believe, however, that the reactions of the Commnist powers,
particularly in the military field, would not be basically
changed by the method of announcement. We also believe that

there would still be increased apprehension among non-Communist

countries.
Page-19
ANNEX

LAND TRANSPORTATION: RAIL

1. ‘The North Victnamese rail systen is neter gauge. The
two rail lines which connect the railrosds of North Victnan with
those of Coununist China are the most important logistic links
for the movonent of military supplics from Coummmist China to
North Victnau. The main route -- Honoi to Dong Dang -- connects
with the Chinese standord-gauge network at Ping-hsiang in Kwangsi
Provinee, where cargo is then transloaded. The Hanoi-Leo Cai
route continucs as a meter-gauge linc into Chiza's yunnan Province
terminating near Kunming. This is Kunming's only rail connection
with the main rail systen of China. The railroad fron Haiphong
to Henoi is important because Haiphong is the main port of North

Victnon.

2. North Vietnam is short of rolling stock, with about
120 locomotives and 1,800 freight cars, and a small number of
petroleum tenk cars. Additional meter-gauge rolling stock and
locomotives could be obtained quickly only from Yunnan Province

where the supply is not large.

 
  
 

GR

Excludea j automatic
Page-20
3. The maximum capacity of each of th: rail routes to China
is about 3,000 metric tons per day each way, but the Hanoi-.ong
Dang line is the more important for the moveent of military
supplies because it provides a link with the rail system of
all of China. Some of the vulnerable points «n this line are
the bridge over the Song Cau about 20 miles northeast of Hanoi,
the bridge over the Red River in Hanoi itself, end the bridge
over the Canal des Rapides about 6 miles northeast of Hanoi.
Some of the vulnerable points on the Hanoi-Lao Cai rail route
are the bridge over the Song Lo (Claire) River about 50 miles
northwest of Hanoi, the bridge about 7 miles southeast of Vinh
Yen, and a bridge over the Nam Si River at the border with

Communist China.
LAND TRANSPORTATION: ROAD

4. The capacity of all roads leading to Hanoi from Kwangsi
Province is about 2,300 metric tons a day during the dry season
and 650 metric tons a day during the wet season. The most
important is highway Route 1A, which runs generally parallel to
the Hanoi-Dong Dang railroad line. The limiting section of this
road has a capacity of about 1,000 metric tons per day during the
dry season and about 300 metric tons during the wet season. There

are alternate, but longer, road systems through Mong Cai and
- AQ =

“BEEP S-E-
Page-21
Cao Bang. There is only one through road between Hanoi and Lao
Cai. This road has a limiting section with a capacity of only
500 metric tons per day during the dry season and is not capable
of supporting truck traffic during the wet season. Another road
west of the Hanoi-Lao Cai rail line also connects Yunnan Province
with Hanoi. The capacity of the limiting section of this road
is about 550 metric tons per day during the dry season and 100
metric tons during the wet season. The most important single
target for disrupting road traffic is the Daumer bridge across

the Red River in Hanoi.

INLAND WATER ROUTES

5. The Red River could be used to supplement other means of
transport from Yunnan Province, particularly during the wet season

when road capacities are reduced.

SEA ROUTES

6. North Vietnam's only mjor port, at Haiphong, is rail
served and has relatively modern cargo-handling facilities. Two
secondary ports at Cam Pha and Hon Gai are well equipped to handle
the export of coal from nearby mines, but have very limited facilities
for handling other types of cargo and are not connected to North

Vietnam's rail system.

- AZ -

eer S-E-Ce
Page-22
BeteP S-E-

7. The bulk of occan-going traffic from China to North
Vietnam originates at Canton, Swatow, Fort Bayard, ané ports on
Hainan Island. In addition, there are approximately 900 motor-
powered and 4,800 sailing junks operating in the coastal waters
of southern China and the adjaccnt northern coasts of North Vietnam.
If one-third of the available junks were devoted to supplying goods
to North Vietnam, they would be capable of transporting an
estimated 570,000 tons annually. These shallow-draft craft would
not require port facilities for off-loading, but could discharge
cargoes over the beach. This type of traffic, which could move
close to shore, would be difficult to detect and intercept. Such
cargoes would, of course, be limited to items which could be

easily handled by these methods.

- AR

ie
Page-23
BSC ——LChine-Nonth:Viehia
MAIN TRANSPORTATION

© Selected port
+ Principal sea route.

+o SETI Standard gauge railroad

—~—t Narrow gauge

   

      

7 VIRNT ANG
pratep [8 Gen.