
Page-1
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR

HerRUOUN FOR THE PRESIDE
. ot :
qhere is attashed a copy of SS 28 covering "onsequences
of the Future pevellation of the Contents of Certein Coverment
Documents," as approved by the Intelligence Advisory Committee
a its meeting 6 May 3952. :
This paper, estimating the consequences for US foreign
relations and for-Us. strategic inierests of the revelation of
volute tudy. entitled wRoport the

made at the Rationed | ‘Soeurity ound’ meeting on Wednesday,

ze 4s plafed that final printed copies of this estinate
Will be forwarded te the National Security, Council on Friday,

= tn

wae Oe SHLTH

date
Page-2
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BGENCT

(AS ARENDED AND. APFROVED BY THE INTELLIGHICE ADVISORY
COMMITIEE AT 17S MeSEING 6 KAY 1952).

6 Bay 1952

SUEIECT: SE-28: CONSEQUENCES OF THE FUTURE REVELATION OF THE
CONTENTS OF CERTAIN GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS

“gem PROBLEK

To estimate the consequer: IS, foreign relations and
kor U8 strategic interests of the revelation of the contents «-
of the two-volune study entitled “asport-of the Federal Trade

comission on the Taterbationsl Petroleum Cartel.”

Tis estimate consi dere the Consequences of the revelation
of the contents of the subject repirt, whether by official publication
or otherwises The estinate does not, consider to what extent the
statenents in the Repost are accurate or already know, but solely
the effect of tia. ¢ revelations: Andividuelly or collectively, as
eLlegations made unde: ‘Tn? syonsorshnip of an arm of the US Government.

 

HARRY S. T NM LTERS
Papers ident’s
Secretary's Fite (SF)
Page-3
BSTLEATE

1. We estimate that official publication of this “nepart
would greatly assist Sovied propagande, would further the achieve-
nent of Soviet objectives throughout’ tne world ad hinder - ‘the
achievenent of US foreign policy objectives, particularly in the
Heer and Middle Bast, “and would otherwise tend to injure US
foreign relations ‘and strategic interests, as more flly set forth
peiowe OS, :

2e We delieve “that the manner of the reveletion of the
sreportts contents, otheruise than by official publication in full
in its present form, would cause the consequences to differ only
in degree fron the consequences “of officiel publication estinsted
herein. The adverse” Velfects ueresn, estimated rdght. be mitigated

- <to some extent by withholding front general release certain
paragraphs waich, would particularly provice propaganda end’
political ammunition to Soviet end other forces in the Hiddle

East opposed othe sitorosts of the Us.
3. Assistance 4o Soviet propigends and to the achieverant,
of Soviet co jectives throuhout the worlds PubMication of the
report would: .
ae Assist, the USSR in pursuing its objective of
dividing the Vest and specificelly of driving

a2

Paper. of Hi!
Secretary's

|.
Page-4
a wedge between the US ond Yiy'‘end between

the US and other European nations.

Greatly ‘assist Soviet propaganda desiged to
dipereait the US and other Yestern Powers in

the Hear snd Middle Zast, and further the

Soviet objective of fostering ng and -perverting

to Commnist ends the spirit of nationalisn

in thst area.

Assist the current Soviet campaign to intwe

2 relaxation of East-Nest trede controls,

through distortion ‘of certean allegations in

‘the Report. to support ‘the propaganda arguient

that as and” western: foreign trade rectiods are
deliberately. eeatrictives :
Assist the wirldwvide Soviet campaign to represent oe
the US and other vestern Powers as “imperialist”

and "colonise" pouers, This effect would be felt

not only da the Near and dale Zast dut also

dn the countries of South and Southeast Asia

and +o ‘Sone extent in Latin Americas

ln Specific Adversé Efiects on the US Position in the Hear
end Biddle East. Publication of the Report would:

~3-
Page-5
HARRY 5,
Papers of

Further prejudice prospects for a settlement of
the Irani oil controversy, in pertioular by
damaging, perhaps irreparebly, the status of

the US as mediator between the UK end. Trans .
Pyblication would ‘tus contribute to the present
economic deterioration end politicel, instability
dn Tran, ‘and increase opportunities for Commnist
subversion. -

Assist forces in other osdeprocucing countries
dn the erea “Viich desire to elter present
contractual exrangenents with the isiternational.
ost conpanies, end thas jeopardize the flow of
oil, which is of reat stratipie ixportance

to the vs ad, ats alllese -

Ham the. general position” sad prestige of the
US and other Western Powers in the ‘area, OF
providing propaganda t sun.tton not only to
Communist ;

nationalist ead other anti-wastera elaentse
Raise doubts in the UK and Frence concerning
US objectives in the Keer and waeate Bast
and possibly jeopardize coord.nation of over

all policies for the arede

she
Page-6
@. As 2 conseqence of c. and d, above, reduce the
prospects for achieving a Middle Bast defense
organizations :

Seriously embarrass. certain governments in the area,

doth dn their relations with the US.end other western
Powers and in their intemal political Situations,

thus increasing “the Likelihood of disorder and deteriore~
tion favorable to extrene netionslist and anti-western
elenents, including Communists,

Other Adverse Effects on US Interests... In addition to the

consequences listed abovey. publication of the Report would:

a.- Tend to impair basis relations between the US snd JK and
to a lesser extent betwven the US and the Netherlands and
Detwoen the US and Frances: to the detrinsnt of US interests
in all. axeas in which 105% coopération wath these powers
is essential ite the achiovenent of US security objectives.

In adidtion to the proposed Mddle fast defense orgenisation,
this vould apply to HATO and to efforts to achieve agreed
policies in the Far Bast’ including Southiast Aslae

Tend to’ Jeopardize US of1 concessions in areas other

then the Hi¢dle East arid to jeopardize other US comercial

and industriel interests aoroad, including private mining
arrangenents in, South Americe end elserberes

-5-
