
Page-1
RR 4erfnor
COPY No. . Yor

SEGRE ASSISTAL? DIE

 

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

CONSEQUENCES OF A RELAXATION OF
NON-COMMUNIST CONTROLS ON TRADE
WITH THE SOVIET BLOC

TEP

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

  

NIE 100-3-54
Approved 16 March 1954

Published 23 March 1954 ore 57-5 reviewer: 3 226: V4y

  
    

KT REV,

:
AUTH: HR 70-2

The Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this

estimate on 16 March 1954. See, however, footnote of

the Director of Naval Intelligence, and the Assistant

Chief of Staf, G-2, Department of the Army, and the

Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, to par-

agraphs 6 and 24. The FBI abstained, the subject being
outside of its jurisdiction,

The following member organizations of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intel-
Ugence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Page-2
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the tecipient indicated on the front cover and of per-
sons under his jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination
may be authorized by the following officials within their Tespective departments:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary for Intelligence, for the Department of
State

b, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army

¢. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
e. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De-
partment or Agency 7

2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-
cable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
ment with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. :

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be re-

quested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with LAC-D-€9/2, 22
June 1953,

PRs
Ris material contains information affe
Stlangl Defense of the Unige
within the mi
Title 18, USC, os .
mission op perett Pmagnner
etfauthorized person is prohibited byl
Page-3
CONSEQUENCES OF A RELAXATION OF NON-COMMUNIST
CONTROLS ON TRADE WITH THE SOVIET BLOC

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the economic, strategic, and political consequences to the Soviet
Bloc and the non-Communist world of a relaxation of non-Communist controls on
trade with the European Soviet Bloc (USSR and European Satellites).

SCOPE

Fhis estimate is addressed to the general consequences of a Program of the char-
acter and magnitude indicated in the Assumptions and does not isolate the specific
effects of decontrol of particular items.

ASSUMPTIONS

 

 

J. By “relaxation of non-Communist con-
trols” is meant the elimination of ém-
bargo and quantitative controls on ship-
ment to the European Soviet Bloc of all
goods except the following, upon which
a complete embargo will be maintained:

a, arms and war equipment as defined
in the international “Reference” Muni-
tions List;

b. atomic energy materials and equip-
ment;

c. a limited number of items — mostly
electronic equipment and metal-working
machinery — which incorporate advanced
technology and unique know-how;

d, tankers, fast merchant ships, and
certain specialized kinds of ships;

e. @ few metals such as molybdenum,
cobalt, and nickel of which a freat pro-
portion of the total world supply is pro-
duced in the Free World; and

f. industrial diamonds and selected
manufactures incorporating them.

2. Present non-Communist controls on
trade with Communist China would be
maintained.

3. The US would not impose more strin-
gent controls on trade with the Bloc than
its allies did.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Any approach to the problem of Com-
munist-Free World trade must be made
in the light of the estimate of NIE-95
and SNIE 11-54, which conclude in sub-
stance: (a) that there is no sign that the

ideological dynamism of the Communist

regime is abating; (b) that the funda-

mental hostility of the Communist rulers

toward the Free World remains un-

changed; and (c) that their basic objec-
_

SESE 1
Page-4
SECRET

tives continue to be an expansion of their
own sphere of power and the eventual
domination of the non-Communist world.

2. Communist proposals and actions in
the politico-economic field must be re-
garded as designed primarily for the ad-
vancement of their basic objectives. One
of these.major objectives is the promotion
of self-sufficiency within the Bloc. Bloc
trade practices are only in part governed
by the normal trade purposes of non-
Communist countries.

3. Non-Communist export controls have
hampered the development of Bloc eco-
nomic and military power. The volume
of trade between the European Soviet
Bloc and the non-Communist world has
declined by about 25 percent since 1948.
This decline has been partly caused by
export controls. It has also been caused,
in part, by Bloc policies of self-sufficiency
and integration of the Satellites into the
Bloc trading area.

4. The relaxation of non-Communist con-
trols on trade with the European Soviet
Bloc would probably produce an increase
in Bloc imports of decontrolled items on
the order of one-half billion dollars an-
nually, but the volume of such imports
might for a year or two range as high as
one billion dollars a year.

5. Relaxation of non-Communist trade
controls would increase Bloc economic

capabilities. However, the over-all effect °

would probably not be significant be-
cause:

a. The estimated increase in Bloc im-
ports would be small relative to Bloc out-
put; and

b. Bloc adjustments to non-Communist
trade controls and general Bloc progress
toward self-sufficiency under controls

 

have almost certainly reduced Bloc needs

for the categories of goods which would
be decontrolled. an

6. The assumed program or relaxation of
controls would improve the Bloc’s strate-
gic position. There are almost certainly
various bottlenecks in the Bloc economy
which would be relieved by the importa-
tion of the items assumed to be decon-
trolled. Certain scarcities would be rem-
edied. In these ways the Bloc economy
would gain advantages from the decon-
trol. However, since we estimate that
the assumed relaxation of controls would
not significantly increase the total Bloc
output.of goods and services and would be
unlikely to increase the proportion of
that output devoted to military produc-
tion or use, the increase in total Bloc
military potential would almost certainly
be small." *

1. Certain strategic gains would accrue
to the Bloc from a relaxation of non-
Communist export controls, particularly
in the short period following decontroL

‘The Director of Naval Intelligence, the Assistant
Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of the Army,
and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The
Joint Staff, belleve that the last sentence of Con-
clusion 6 should be amended as follows:

“However, since we estimate that the as-
sumed relaxation of controls would not sig-
nificantly Increase the total Bloc output of
goods and services and would be unlikely to
increase the proportion of that output de-
voted to military production or use, the in-
crease in total Bloc military potential would
probably be small on a quantitative basts.
Qualitatively this increase resulting from the
assumed relaxation of controls could provide
significantly important additions to Bloc
military capabilities.” *

*It must be borne in mind that under any system
of trade controls, there is always danger that
individual items capable of conferring strategic
advantage may be obtained by the Bloc. This
danger might be increased by relaxation of con-
trols.

-_

ees ha
Page-5
CHERED— 3

Their value to the Soviet Bloc would be
increased if Bloc leaders anticipate the
outbreak of general war in the near fu-
ture. Over the long run Bloc military
capabilities would be somewhat enhanced
by the slightly higher rate of economic
development and the greater flexibility
which a relaxation of non-Communist
trade controls would make possible.

8. Increased trade with the Bloc conse-
quent upon relaxation of controls would
have no significant direct economic effect
on the US and only a modest over-all eco-
nomic effect on the non-Communist
world. However, some Western European
countries would anticipate significant
economic gains from expansion of trade
with the Bloc. It is improbable that
such trade as is likely to result from the
relaxation of export controls would have
any significant effect upon the military
Potential of the non-Communist world.

9. The relaxation of non-Communist con-
trols on trade with the European Soviet
Bloc, including the Soviet Far East,
would considerably reduce the effective-
ness of existing non-Communist controls
on trade with Communist China. In this
situation, maintenance of these controls

would cause resentment in the non-Com- '
munist countries with an.economic in-
terest in trade with Communist: China,
particularly Japan.

10. The governments of most countries

’ participating in the non-Communist ex-

port control system now believe that the
effect of present controls on Soviet Bloc
power is disproportionately small in re-
lation to the domestic political disadvan-
tages and the loss of trade opportunities
which these controls entail. The present
arrangements are, therefore, a growing
source of irritation and impatience with
US leadership and of differences between
other members over relative stringency
of controls and enforcement. If controls
are maintained as at present, dissension
over them will contribute to the vulner-
ability of certain non-Communist coun-
tries, for example France and Italy, to
Bloc economic and psychological war-
fare. A relaxation of trade controls
would probably influence the COCOM
countries which favor it to be more co-
operative in administering the remain-
ing controls, although pressures for fur-
ther decontrol ‘of individual items will
probably recur.

DISCUSSION

(. EFFECT OF NON-COMMUNIST EXPORT
CONTROLS UPON THE SOVIET BLOC

11. Non-Communist export controls, which
have been developed progressively since March
1948, have had some effect in retarding the
Soviet Bloc’s over-all economic development
and the growth of Bloc military potential.
Both of these effects have been due, in part,
to the burden of the economic adjustments
forced upon the Bloc by deprivation of im-
ports of strategic goods. The strain involved
in effecting these adjustments was greatest in
the period immediately following the imposi-

tion of controls and has continued, though in
diminishing intensity. Growth of Bloc mili-
tary potential has been hindered also directly
by controls upon the export of non-Commu-
nist arms and war equipment. Controls on
arms and war equipment would not be af-
fected by the program of decontrol assumed
in this estimate.

12. It is probable that by this time the Bloc
has carried out extensive adjustments to the
imposition of non-Communist export controls
by reallocating scarce materials from the less
strategic industries, by developing substitutes,

CEORES—
Page-6
BEORES “4

and by providing new capacity for production
of formerly imported goods. However, even
after such adjustments have been made, it
probably still costs the Bloc more to produce
most of the controlled items than it would to
purchase them in the markets of the non-
Communist world. The Bloc’s continuing de-
sire for certain items controlled by the non-
Communist export control system is clearly
indicated. by the elaborate and costly means
by which the Bloc seeks to import these items.
By contrast, the Bloc has not, at least until
recently, exerted itself to expand its imports
of consumer goods and other noncontrolled
items.

13. It is evident, therefore, that non-Commu-
nist export controls have hampered the devel-
opment of Bloc economic and military power.
The problem is to determine how much«the
Bloc’s economic and military power would be
enhanced by the assumed relaxation of con-
trols, as well as to determine the effects of
such a decontrol program upon the cohesion
and strength of the non-Communist world.

lt, LEVEL AND PATTERN OF TRADE BETWEEN
THE BLOC AND THE NON-COMMUNIST
WORLD IN THE EVENT OF A RELAXA-
TION OF TRADE CONTROLS

The Soviet Bloc

14. The volume of trade between the Euro-
pean Soviet Bloc and the non-Communist
world has declined by about 25 percent since
1948. This decline has been partly caused
by export controls. It has also been caused,
in part, by the Bloc policies of self-sufficiency
and integration of the Satellites into the Bloc
trading area. It is unlikely that the Kremlin
would make any important modification of
these basic policies as a consequence of the
relaxation of non-Communist trade controls.
The Soviet Bloc would probably not seek to re-
sume the importation of decontrolled items at
the level and pattern of the period immedi-
ately preceding the imposition of controls.

15. We have estimated that, “The Bloc could
almost certainly expand its external trade to,
say, two or three times the 1952 level without
markedly retarding its progress toward self-

sufficiency.”* Most of the goods that the
Bloc is currently and legally importing are
probably important enough to the Bloc so
that their importation would continue even
after presently controlled items became avail-
able. Hence the removal of controls would
almost certainly result in an increase in the
total volume and value of Bloc importations
from the non-Communist world, not simply
in a substitution of new imports for those .
Presently purchased. To the extent that the
efforts of the Bloc to maintain or to increase
trade with the non-Communist world have in
the past been determined by the economic
warfare objective of fostering dissension in
non-Communist countries over export con-
trols, the relaxation of controls would reduce
the vigor of such efforts.

16. Relaxation of controls on, trade with the
European Soviet Bloc would Permit Commu-
nist China to obtain the decontrolled items
via European Bloc countries. Communist
China would thereby be enabled to obtain
from non-Communist sources commodities
which it cannot now import from such sources
and which the European Soviet Bloc is un-
willing or unable to supply in adequate quan-
tity. The extent to which Communist China
could obtain additional imports in this man-
ner would depend on decisions of the Kremlin
which would be affected by considerations of
general Sino-Soviet relations, as well as by the
increased ability of the European Soviet Bloc
to obtain decontrolled items from non-Com-
munist countries. Moreover, the increase in
trade between the European Bloc and the non-
Communist world might also enable Commu-
nist China to develop additional export out-
lets in non-Communist countries through Eu-
ropean Bloc countries and thus increase Com-
munist China's ability to pay for imports.
These developments could not be prevented
by present controls on shipping services and
bunkers in connection with trade with Com-
munist China, and would be facilitated if the
relaxation of controls on trade with the Euro-

“See NIE 10-54, “Soviet Bloc Economic Warfare
Capabilities and Courses of Action,” 9 March
1954, paragraph 4. :

-_

bECRE
Page-7
6HGREP

pean Soviet Bloc were to make non-Commu-
nist ships more freely available for sale to
European Bloc countries.

The Non-Communist World

17. Under conditions short of war or the im-
mediate threat of war, it is likely that expand-
ing productive capacity in the non-Communist
world will result in increasing pressure to find
markets forthe goods of the type which would
be decontrolled. There will be enough eco-
nomic slack in most non-Communist coun-
tries, even in the absence of recession, to in-
terest them in increased sales to the Bloc.
Ability to supply additional exports on a con-
tinuing basis may be assumed. In the event
of a significant contraction of total demand
in the non-Communist world, the pressure to
find market outlets in the Bloc Would increase
considerably.

Effects of Relaxation of Controls upon the
Level and Pattern of Trade

18. If the European Soviet Bloc responded to
the assumed relaxation of trade controls by
resuming the importation of decontrolled
items at the 1948 level, adjusted upward in
Proportion to the growth of the European
Bloc economy since 1948, the annual volume
of Bloc trade with the non-Communist world
would probably undergo an increase on the
order of $500 million. This calculation can
only be taken as a rough guide to the results
of relaxation of controls. On the one hand,
Bloc adjustments to non-Communist trade
controls and general Bloc progress toward
Self-sufficiency under controls have almost
certainly reduced Bloc needs for the cate-
gories of goods which would be decontrolled.
On the other hand, it is possible that the Bloc
would take advantage of decontrol to depart
temporarily from its long-run policy of re-
ducing ‘external trade, in expectation of
achieving self-sufficiency at higher levels of
output. In this event, Bloc trade with the
non-Communist world might, for a year or
two, exceed present levels by as much as $1
billion.

19. In view of the time necessary for trade
negotiations, production, and delivery, a

 

period of from two to three years would prob-
ably be required before the maximum effects
of the relaxation of controls were felt. It is
also probable as a consequence of a continua-
tion of Soviet Bloc policies of self-sufficiency
that there would subsequently be a decline in
Bloc trade in relation to income and total
world trade.

20. How the increase in Bloc imports would
be distributed among the decontrolled items
is impossible to determine. It ts probable
that the Bloc would be particularly interested
in importing decontrolled items in such cate-
gories as precision instruments, chemical
equipment, electronic equipment, diesel en-
gines, and special-purpose ships. The Bloc
would probably also desire to import some
items of transportation equipment, certain
types of ball and roller bearings and high
alloy steel, certain types of lubricants and
Specialized petroleum products, and Possibly
some types of synthetic rubber. Metals which
it is likely to wish to import on a significant
scale include copper and Possibly lead. The
decontrolled goods which the Bloc would be
most likely to want to buy would have to come
mainly from Western Europe and the US.

Ml. EFFECTS OF A RELAXATION OF TRADE
CONTROLS UPON THE SOVIET BLOC

Economic

21. The over-all effect upon the European
Bloc economy of the assumed relaxation of
trade controls and the resultant increase in
trade with the non-Communist world would
depend upon the extent to which deprivation
of the items proposed for decontrol limits
Bloc output and the extent to which free ac-
cess to non-Communist sources of these items
would stimulate the growth of Bloc output.
Although it is clear that the Bloc would bene-
fit from decontrol of these items, the adjust-
ments made by the Bloc in response to the
imposition of trade controls have gone suffi-
ciently far to make the present importance for
economic growth of imports of these items
less than it was at the time the controls were
imposed. Quantitatively, the effect upon the
Bloc of a continuation of controls on the cate-
-—

SEGRE
Page-8
SHGRET 6

gories proposed for decontrol is the difference
between what it now costs the Bloc (in terms
of economic resources) to procure those items
by all means {including not only domestic
production but also illegal imports and pay-
ment of premium prices), and what those
items would cost if purchased in non-Commu-
nist markets in the absence of control. On
this basis it is estimated that an increase of
one-half to one billion dollars in trade in the
decontrolled items would result in a net eco-
nomic gain to the European Bloc of the order
of $300 to $600 million a year, or about a quar-
‘ter to a half of 1 percent of European Bloc
GNP.

22. There are almost certainly various bottle-
necks in the Bloc economy which would be
srelieved by the importation of the items as-
sumed to be decontrolled. Certain scarcities
would be remedied. In these ways the Bloc
economy would gain advantages from the de-
control We believe it unlikely, however, that
Such expansions in individual sectors of the
Bloc economy as would result from the as-
sumed importations after decontrol would
significantly modify the estimate of the con-
tribution to over-all Bloc economic capabilities
as stated in paragraph 21.

Strategic

23. The Bloc would gain a strategic advan-
tage from a relaxation of non-Communist ex-
port controls which cannot be adequately
measured by the comparatively slight effect
which such a relaxation would have on the
growth of Bloc GNP or on military expendi-
tures. If the increase in rate of growth of
GNP were disproportionately concentrated in
the fields of military and military-supporting
production, the Bloc would get a considerable
strategic advantage from its increased access
to non-Communist markets.

24. We believe, however, that the assumed
program of relaxation of controls would not
greatly advance the rate of growth of the
Bloc’s military potential, assuming controls to
be effectively maintained on the categories
listed in the Assumptions, and specifically on
items constituting bottlenecks to military
production. In the light of the various fac-

tors determining the Bloc's over-all allocation
of resources, we believe thatthe assumed pro-
gram of relaxation of controls would Probably
not lead the Bloc to increase the Proportion
of its resources allocated to military use. Since
we estimate that the assumed relaxation of
controls would not significantly increase the
total Bloc output of goods and services and
would be unlikely to increase the Proportion
of that output devoted to military production
or use, the increase in total Bloc military po-
tential would almost certainly be small.

25. Certain strategic gains would accrue to
the Bloc from a relaxation of non-Communist
export controls, particularly in the short
period following decontrol. The opportunity
to build up strategic stockpiles of such mate-
rials as copper and lead, to acquire certain
kinds of machinery and equipment, and to
build up its merchant fleet, would be par-
ticularly useful if the Bloc anticipated the
outbreak of general war' in the near future.
Over the long run Bloc military capabilities
would be somewhat enhanced by the slightly
higher rate of economic development and the
greater flexibility which a relaxation of non-
Communist trade controls would make Possi-
ble.

Political

26. The relaxation of non-Communist export
controls as assumed would not Significantly
affect the political cohesion of the European
Soviet Bloc. However, the continuation of

‘The Director of Naval Intelligence, the Assistant
Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of the Army, and
the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, believe that the last sentence of paragraph
24 should be amended as follows:

“Since we estimate that the assumed relaxa-
tion of controls would not significantly in-
crease the total Bloc output of goods and
services and would be unUkely to increase the
Proportion of that output devoted to military
production or use, the increase in total Bloc
military potential would probably be small

on a quantitative basis. Qualitatively this ”

increase resulting from the assumed relaxa-
tion of controls could provide significantly
important additions to Bloc military capa-
billties.”
“See SNIE 11-54, “Likelthood of General War
Through 1957," 15 February 1954,

seers
Page-9
CEERES

present controls over trade with Communist
China might occasion some friction between
China and the USSR if the Kremlin exploited
its monopolistic position as agent for Chinese
purchases of decontrolled items. While the
Bloc would probably regard the relaxation of
controls as in part removing an important
target of psychological warfare in the non-
Communist world, Bloc propaganda would al-
“most certainly attempt to portray the re-
laxation as a victory for the Communist
“peace campaign.” Bloc economic planners,
although they would be quick to take advan-
tage of the opportunities offered to increase
imports of scarce items, would nevertheless be
inclined to view the relaxation with suspicion
and for some time after would be prepared for
a reversal of non-Communist trade policy.
The fundamental hostility of Bloc leaders to
the non-Communist world would remain un-
changed.

IV. EFFECTS OF A RELAXATION OF TRADE
CONTROLS UPON THE NON-
COMMUNIST WORLD

Economic

27. The increase in trade between the non-
Communist world and the Soviet Bloc which
would result from relaxation of trade controls,
would have only a modest over-all economic
effect on the non-Communist world. In the
next several years, however, such an increase
in trade would be attractive to some Western
European countries. Although the underly-
ing economic position of most Western Euro-
pean countries is now stronger than at any
time in the postwar period, Western Europe is
likely to have unutilized capacity in the chem-
ical, metallurgical, and engineering industries.
These industries could readily supply the in-
crease in exports to the Soviet Bloc without
curtailing exports to other markets. Some
non-Communist raw - materials - producing
countries would also be benefitted, but only
moderately. Increased trade with the Bloc
would have no significant direct economic
effect on the US.

28. Increased trade with the Bloc would, how-
ever, offer dollar-saving opportunities for
Western Europe. The Bloc could increase by

about one-third of a billion dollars its Present
exports to Western Europe of grain, timber,
sugar, and other primary products to replace
Purchases from the dollar area. In addition
the Bloc could sell gold to Western Europe in
the event of an import surplus, Although
dollar savings are less important to Western ,
Europe than formerly because of the improved
dollar position of the area; they may become
of increasing significance after 1955, if US
economic aid and extraordinary dollar ex-
penditures drop sharply.

29. Most of the underdeveloped countries in
the non-Communist world stand to gain little
economically from such trade as is likely to
result from the relaxation of trade controls,
and may actually suffer an economic loss as a
Tesult of such trade. On the one hand, the
only strategic commodities of any economic
significance produced by these countries
which might be decontrolled are copper and
lead. With decontrol Bloc imports of these
and certain other minor items might amount
to $50 million per annum at the most. On
the other hand, the Bloc will seek to pay for
its increased imports chiefly through sales of
primary products. These exports by and
large will compete with the exports of under-
developed countries in the non-Communist
world and could depress already weakening
prices for such products as wheat and man.
ganese.

30. An increase of trade between non-Commu-
nist countries and the Bloc based on Bloc im-
ports of decontrolled items would, if concen-
trated in certain of the weaker non-Commu-
nist countries, tend to establish a degree of
economic dependence in those countries on
the Bloc which the Bloc could exploit for eco-
nomic warfare purposes.*

Strategic

31. It is improbable that such trade as is
likely to result from the relaxation of export.
controls would have any significant | effect
upon the military potential of the non-Com-
munist world. Relaxation of controls might

*See NIE 10-54, “Soviet Bloc Economic Warfare
Capabilities and Courses of Action," 9 March
1954. .

-_

SECREL
Page-10
CECREL . &

contribute to a relaxation of tensions between
the non-Communist world and the Bloc. Any
significant relaxation of tensions would prob-
ably lead some non-Communist countries to
reduce their military expenditures.

Political

32. The present international system of ex-
Port controls commands at best lukewarm
support in the non-Communist world outside
the US. The other members of the Coordi-
nating Committee for the international trade
control program (COCOM) regard the present
arrangements as no longer appropriate to a
Period of apparent relaxation of tensions and
view them as disproportionately costly in rela-
tion to their effect upon Bloc economic and
military capabilities. ‘They consider that
these measures will not in the long run make
an appreciable difference in Soviet Bloc capa-
bilities relative to the capabilities of the non-
Communist world. They believe that in the
short run the risk of general war, while not
. absent, is not great enough to warrant fore-
going the gains from trade which they believe
would follow the relaxation of controls. ‘These
governments, moreover, are under frequent
Pressure from various business and labor
groups to authorize particular transactions
now precluded under existing international
restrictions. The present arrangements are,
therefore, a growing source of irritation and
impatience with US leadership and of differ-
ences between other members over relative
stringency of controls and enforcement.

33. If controls are maintained as at present,
future COCOM deliberations both on Policy
and on questions of particular transactions
will probably be marked by persistent UK
reluctance to support the US Position. Since
the other members of COCOM have never been
willing to go further than the UK and have
Generally followed the latter's lead, the US
will probably meet increasing opposition and
Progressive erosion of the Present control sys-
tem through the granting of exceptions and

the relaxation of enforcement. However, the
UK and the other members of COCOM will
almost certainly not choose to run the risk of
breaching their relations with the US over the
issue of trade controls.

34. If controls are maintained as at present,
dissension over them will contribute to the
vulnerability of certain non-Communist coun-
tries, for example France and Italy, to Bloc
economic and psychological warfare.

35. COCOM countries would Probably find the
short list of strategic items which’ would be
retained under the assumed Program of re-
laxation easier to administer and enforce
than the present lists, and the character of
the items on the short list is such as to make
disputes on the retention of individual items
less frequent. A relaxation of trade controls
would probably influence the COCOM coun-
tries which favor it to be more cooperative in
administering the remaining controls, al-
though pressures for further decontro! of in-
dividual items will probably recur.

36. The relaxation of non-Communist con-
trols on trade with the European Soviet Bloc,
including the Soviet Far East, would consid-
erably reduce the effectiveness of existing
non-Communist controls on trade with Com-
munist China. In this situation mainte-
nance of these controls would cause resent-
ment in the non-Communist countries with
an economic interest in trade with Commu-
nist China, particularly Japan.

37. For some of the weaker non-Communist
countries, a large expansion of trade with the
Bloc could increase Soviet Political influence.
We believe that the Bloc would make a re-
laxation of controls the occasion for inten-
Sifying its efforts to augment the size and
number of its overseas trade missions and
establishments, and that some non-Commu-
nist states would permit such augmentation.
Whatever success the Bloc achieves in this
regard will contribute to its potential for
espionage, subversion, and propaganda.
Page-11
