
Page-1
Director of —Seeret.
Central

Intelligence

 

Dependence of Soviet Military

Power on Economic Relations
With the West

Special National Intelligence Estimate

Declassified and Approved for Release
by the Central Intelligence Agency
Date: 2001

—Seeret—

SNIE 3/11-4-81
17 Novernber 1981

“285
Page-2
Warning Notice
Sensitive fatelligence Sources and Methods {a
(WNINTEL)

 
 

  

NATIONAL SECURITY INFO!
Unauthorized Disclosure Subject to Crishin

 
 

 

NOFORN-— Not Releasable to Géreign Nationals
NOCONTRACT- Not Releasable to/Contractors or

 
 

 

PROPIN- * Caution—Profrietary Information Involved
NFIBONLY- NFB DO
ORCON- Dissemiagtion and Ertrcetions of {aformation

 

 
 

REL... This formation Has Been Authorized for

 
   
 

FGt- Gfceign Government information

 

Review On 17 Moe 2001

 

 

 

Regular
cece’ of NFAC reports in either microfiche or printed form can also be
aregfaged through OCO/IMD.
Page-3
SNIE 3/11-4-81

: DEPENDENCE OF SOVIET MILITARY +
| : POWER ON ECONOMIC RELATIONS
WITH THE WEST

 

Information available as of 17 November 1981 was
used in the preparation of this Estimate.
Page-4
THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the
Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security
Agency, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Treasury.

Also Participating:
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

__The Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps
Page-5
PREFACE

This Estimate assesses the importance of East-West economic
telations to Soviet military power in the 1980s. It looks first at the West
as a source of military-related technology and then at the role of East-
West trade in helping the Soviet leadership to continue to expand
military programs in spite of a severe economic slowdown. The
Estimate concludes with a discussion of the potential impact on the
USSR of increased Western restrictions on East-West trade and technol-
ogy transfer. .

The Estimate ‘does not address the problem of securing Western
cooperation in any expansion of controls over economic relations with
the East or the impact of these controls on the Western economies. It
does not consider how to stop leaks, diversions, the flow of open
information, and espionage. Nor does it discuss the problem of differen-
tiating between Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in Western export
control policy.

The broad scope of the Estimate does not permit detailed treat-
ment of export control issues.
Page-6
KEY JUDGMENTS

| Acquisition of goods and technology from the West enhances
Soviet military programs in two principal ways: by making available
specific technologies that permit improvements in weapon and military
support systems and the efficiency of military and civilian production
technology; and by providing economic gains from trade that improve
the efficiency of the economy and thereby reduce the burden of
defense. Soviet military power is based fundamentally on the large size

\ and diversity of the Soviet economy and the breadth of the Soviet
technical and scientific base, on Soviet success in acquiring sophisticated
technology in the West, and on the longstanding preferred status of the
military sector.

The USSR recognizes that it will be hard pressed to maintain its
relative position in the technical sophistication of its weapons compared
with those of the West. Moscow will therefore continue to seek Western
technology useful for its future weapon systems by all means, including
those illegal means that have been successful-in the- past, such as
clandestine acquisition, illegal imports, and third-country diversions.
The Soviets will especially need equipment and technology for their
electronics, aerospace,.and shipbuilding industries.

Soviet economic performance has deteriorated to the point that, if

\ military expenditures continue to expand as in the past, there will be
few if any resources left with which to raise living standards. Even slow
growth of the Soviet economy depends in substantial part on continued -
imports of Western machinery, grain, and equipment for the energy
sector:

‘

* The USSR needs large-scale imports of Western food, especially
grain, to increase food supplies even in good crop years, and to
keep them from falling in bad years.

 

 

 

 

+ Western pipe and compressors are essential for the rapid expan-
sion of Soviet gas production, which will be the main source of
additional energy supplies and hard currency in the 1980s.

1
SECRET
Page-7
+ Western equipment also is increasingly important in oil produc-
tion, and imports of Western production equipment, especially
advanced machine tools, would help to raise labor productivity at
a time when the labor. force will be growing much more slowly
than in the past.

Western restrictions on nonstrategic trade, if broadly supported
and sustained, would aggravate Soviet economic problems appreciably.
Short of comprehensive Western restrictions on trade, a Western
embargo on oil and gas equipment would have the greatest impact. A
denial of new Western credits would probably force a decline in overall
Soviet hard currency imports. In none of these cases would unilateral
US actions have much effect. Any decision to impose additional
restrictions would have to consider their impact on the West as well as
on the USSR

Reduced economic capability would’ make allocations to Soviet
military programs more painful but probably would not lead to cuts in
these programs in the next several years. The Soviet military buildup
has great momentum and domestic political support. Faced with what it
would consider economic warfare, Moscow would be likely to turn to
more autarkic economic policies, tighter internal discipline, and a more
truculent foreign policy: At the saiie’time, it is highly probable that
these policies would result in increased popular dissatisfaction, reduced
worker productivity, further reductions in long-term investment in
order to meet short-term needs, and greater inefficiency overall in the
operation of the Soviet economy.

The West could slow improvement in the performance of Soviet
weapons by the late 1980s or the early 1990s by broadening controls
over exports of military-related technology—and increasing its efforts to
plug leakages. While there is little likelihood that even comprehensive
and sustained Western economic sanctions in the near term would
significantly affect Soviet military programs—many of which are
already well under way—such sanctions applied for a number of years
could retard qualitative improvements to Soviet weapon systems and
give rise to significant pressures internally to reduce military spending
at @ time when the rest of the economy is in growing difficulty. This
would be even more likely should the USSR’s economic problems be

more prolonged than the Soviet leaders expect and the remedies harder
to find and slower to take effect.
Page-8
°

own Sa

DISCUSSION

 

 

Background

1, Ata time when the Soviet military position vis-a-
vis the West has never been stronger, the Soviet
economy is under serious strain. Even before the onset
of the long-anticipated labor shortages, industrial and
energy growth continues to slow, agriculture has en-
countered one crisis after anotlier, and shortages of
industrial materials, machinery, and consumer goods
are common. Soviet defense outlays, meanwhile, con-
tinue to rise, with the support of the leadership,
despite troubles in the civilian economy.

The West as a Source of the USSR’s
Military-Related Technology

2. While the Soviet economy is large and diverse,
with a broad technical and scientific base, it has only
been through an extraordinary allocation of resources
to defense that the Soviets have attained their present
military power. Soviet weapons are designed to mini-
mize the requirements for technologies in which the
USSR is deficient, but the Soviets have turned to legal
and illegal acquisitions of Western. technologies (see
table 1) to make up for domestic shortcomings.

3. The Soviet armed forces are being modernized in
nearly every category of weapon’systems. Soviet mili-
tary hardware, which was at one time distinguished
for its rugged simplicity, has been qualitatively im-
proved until it is in some instances the technological
equal of—if not superior to—military hardware pro-
duced in the West. Without: Western technology,
modernization and qualitative improvement of Soviet
military equipment would have proceeded at a slower
pace.

4. Through the acquisitions of Western technology
and hardware, the Soviets have been able to satisfy
certain R&D and production objectives:

— The reduction of engineering risk by following
or copying proven Western designs.

— The reduction of R&D time and production
costs by the use of Western designs and technol-
ogy and equipment.

— The incorporation of countermeasures early in
the Soviet weapon development process.

In addition, the Soviets have been able to upgrade
critical industrial sectors such as computers, semicon-
ductors, and metallurgy, as well as to modernize
Warsaw Pact industrial manufacturing capabilities.
This has also helped to limit the rise in military”
production costs.

5. Reliance on Western technology forces the Sovi-
ets to incur some vulnerabilities:

— Locking them into a permanent lag behind the
West, especially when whole systems are copied,
as with general purpose computers.

— Eschewing the better understanding of the tech-
nology of the imported system which they
would obtain by doing original research from
scratch.

— Directing new developments into paths that are
better understood by the West than if the Soviets
had originated their own designs thus enabling
the West to evaluate Soviet designs more easily.

  

The Soviets historically have given high priority
he acquisition of Western technology, indicating
that such technology is of great value to them. The
means of transfer are shown in table 2. Of all the
avenues for technology transfer, clandestine collection,
illegal trade diversions, and third-country transfers of
defense-related technology have had the most direct
impact on Soviet weapon systems. In recent years the
Soviets have increasingly tasked the East European
nations to act as‘ surrogates in clandestine and illegal
acquisitions of Western technology.

7. Over the past five years, Soviet illegal trade
efforts have concentrated on computers, microelec-
tronics, air-breathing propulsion technology, guidance
and navigation systems, underwater acoustical sensors,
optical (including laser-related) technologies, and ad-
vanced manufacturing processes and equipment. De-
tected diversions and evasions over the past several
Page-9
Table 1

Acquisitions From the West in the Key Areas of Soviet Military Technology

 

 

 

 

 

 

Key Technology Areas Notable Successes =o

‘Computers Illegal and legal trade acquisitions of complete systems, hardware and software, and clandestine
acquisition of proprietary information; exploitation of captured avionics and fire-control systems. A wide
variety of Western minicomputers have been used in military systems.

Microelectronics Acquisition of complete industrial processes and semiconductor manufacturing equipment through legal
and illegal trade channels.

Signal processing Illcgat trade acquisition of seismic streamers and associated computers and of acoustic spectrum analyzers.

Communications Mlcgal trade acquisition of low-power, low-noise, high-sensitivity receivers,

Production Legal and illegal acquisitions of automated and precision manufacturing equipment for electronics,

Directed energy
Guidance and navigation

* Power sources

Structural materials
Propulsion

Nuclear weapons

Chemical explosives
‘Acoustic sensors (ASW)

Nonacoustic sensors (ASW) |

materials, and possibly optical and laser weapons components; clandestine acquisition of documentation on
production technology of weapons, ammunition, aircraft parts, turbine blades, computers, and electronic
components.

Acquisition of metal foils and optical components through legal and illegal channels. *

Legal and illegal trade acquisitions off vigation receivers; illegal and clandestine
acquisitions of advanced inertial guidance components, including miniature and laser gyros; acquisition of
captured US equipment including terrain-following radars, antiradiation missiles, and fire-control
systems; clandestine acquisitions of air-to-air and surface-to-aic (SAM) missiles and of antisubmarine
warfare (ASW) cruise missile and tactical ballistic missile guidance subsystems; legal acquisition of
precision machinery for ball bearing production.

Acquisition of superconducting energy storage systems and associated cryogenic equipment through legal
trade.

Legal purchases and intelligence acquisitions of Western titanium alloys and welding equipment.
Acquisition of missile case filament-winding technology through legal and illegal trade, of some ground
propulsion technology through illegal and legal trade (diesels, turbines, and rotarics), and of submarine
nuclear propulsion plant designs by clandestine means; legal and illegal purchases of advanced jet engine

 

_.- fabrication technology and jet engine design information through clandestine.means; acquisition of

captured jet engines from Vietnam.
Clandestine acquisition of designs for various bombs and warheads of RV-related datal_

(sec also “production" and “chemical explosives”).
Clandestine acquisition of manufacturing details of advanced high explosives for nuclear weapons.
Acquisition through clandestine means of underwater navigation and direction-finding equipment and of
scismic streamers through illegal trade diversion.

 

 

Radar Exploitation of captured terrain-following radar and airborne intercept radar; clandestine acquisition of
air defense radars and antenna designs for US SAM systems.

Electro-optic sensors Clandestine acquisition of information on US reconnaissance satellite technology; illegal trade acquisitions
of laser rangefinders for tanks. .

san ae.

years were particularly heavy in the field of
semiconductor manufacturing equipment, reflecting
the Soviets’ intent to improve their entire electronic
components industry.

Requirements for Foreign Technology in the 1980s

8. During each of the last two decades the Soviets
have deployed about 150 military and aerospace
systems, newly designed or substantially modified. We

‘
expect this rate to continue over the next decade. Thus
far we have identified about 110 systems for
development in the 1980s, some 60 to 70 of which we
expect to be deployed by the mid-1980s. The new
weapon systems reveal specific infusions of Western
technology. Most current Soviet weapons are of the
third or fourth generation. Because they have a well-
established and sophisticated military design and pro-
duction capability of their own, the Soviets pursue
Page-10
“SEERER

_

Table 2

Selected Technology Transfer Mechanisms
Used by the Soviets «

»-Diréct investment in Eastern Europe

+ Complete (turnkey) plant sales

+ Patents and licenses with extensive teaching effort

+ Joint ventures and joint production development

+ Technical exchanges with ongoing contact

* “Know-how"—training, consulting in high-technology areas

+ Processing equipment (with know-how)

* Technical data and engineering documents

+ Proposals, presale negotiations, and sales presentations

+ Commercial visits

+ Governmental and industrial equipment siles

+ Sales of products

+ Scientific and technical and student exchanges

* Open literature Gournals, magazines, technical papers, for
example)

+ S&T conferences, trade shows, and exhibits

+ Hostile intelligence service acquisitions

+ Recruited agents and industrial espionage

+ Ulegal arms trade

+ Illegal trade in other commodities

+ End-user diversions

+ Third-country diversions

+ Foreign signals intelligence (SIGINT)

+ Capture in war

* All transfer mechanisms can be employed with or without the
Participation of hostile intelligence service personnel. The involve-
ment of such personnel can range from the overt, legal collection of
unclassified, unembargoed technology to the clandestine acquisition
of classified, military technology by agents working pursuant to the
direction of hostile intelligence service personnel. Furthermore,
most of the transfer mechanisms can be legally or illegally
employed.

only selected Western design elements and engineer-*
ing approaches. In the aircraft industry, for example,
the Soviets are applying Western designs and industri.
al technology to the IL-76 aircraft to be used in an
AWACS program and Western numerically controlled
machine tools in the production of the SU-25 ground
support fighter. .

9. The Soviet approach to military R&D relies in
many cases on evolutionary and incremental steps to
minimize technological risks and avoid production
problems, although the Soviets have demonstrated the
ability to develop and deploy innovative military
systems when their needs could not be satisfied with
the more incremental approach—for example, their
A-class submarine and their antisatellite (ASAT) sys-
tem. In addition to production technologies across a
broad spectrum, new generations of Soviet weapons
also will require critical component and subsystem

 

technologies. It is in these areas that Soviet legal
acquisitions of dual-use technology, complemented by
illegal and clandestine acquisitions, are most likely to
be concentrated.

10. During the 1980s, advances in sophisticated
microelectronics and materials are expected to pace
the development of new weapon systems. The Soviets
and their Warsaw Pact allies are also likely to need
many of the new Western critical component technol-
egies and the production equipment and technology
needed to manufacture them.

1L. A selection of systems projected for the Soviets
in significant mission areas for the 1990s is shown in
the left column of table 8. The key technologies that
are required by the Soviets for these potential systems
are displayed in the right column of table 3 and have
been targets of known Soviet acquisition efforts. Of
the key technologies listed in table 8, four—comput-
ers, microelectronics, signal processing, and production
technology—have an especially broad impact. For
example, microelectronics developments are critical to
advances in computers, signal processing, missile guid-
ance, and communications systems. Production tech-
nology is a critical prerequisite to advances in Soviet
microelectronics, computers, marine systems, and
some areas of propulsion development. Furthermore,
the Soviets have attempted to upgrade their precision
machining capability by importing machine tools.
These imports have significantly improved Soviet pre-
cision manufacturing capabilities in military-related
areas—for example, in the production of miniature
bearings for strategic missile guidance.

12. The Soviets lag behind the Western state of the
art in the design and manufacture of certain modern
‘weapon components, such as microprocessors, inte-
erated optics, and high-temperature turbine blades.
They are hampered in a number of key technology
areas by their inability to develop computer-aided
design and integrated computer-aided manufacturing
equipment.

East-West Trade and the Soviet Economy

18. The performance of the Soviet economy is
worsening. Although the economy is still expanding, its
rate of growth has fallen drastically. The slowdown
stems mainly from rising resource costs, systemic
inefficiencies, shortfalls in agriculture and in key
industries such as steel, and an accumulation of plan-
Page-11
Table 3

Selected Soviet Systems Projected for Initial Operational Capability in the 1990s

 

 

 

System/Concept Poteatial New Performance Key Technology *
Improved air- “Advanced lookdown/shootdown; Materials,
superiority possibly contro! configured guidance,

aircraft computers,

New weapon system for Accuracy (CEP) of 500 to 600 Computers, guidance/
Typhoon ballistic meters navigation, materials

missile submarine &

 

Modernized theater

Versatile survivable equipment,

Microelectronics

 

 

 

 

 

command, control, and automated control system computers, produc-
communication systems tion communication
(widespread deployment)
New class of attack High speed, great depth, Production, materials,
submarine quietness propulsion
T-80 tank follow-on > Improved day/night cross- ‘Sensors, materials
country mobility; armor
protection
‘Advanced space station Permanently manned, multimission ‘Sensors, signal
(permanently manned) & processing
Space-based laser Multiple target capability Directed energy,
antisatellite system

 

« Key teckinology available for systems development.
*® May reach initial operational capability in the late 1980s.

Thi iS

ning mistakes. As a result of these conditions, growth
of labor productivity has slowed at a time when
demographic trends have greatly curtailed the supply
of new labor.

14. Economic growth in the 1980s, projected at 2
percent per year or less, will probably be insufficient to
support past rates of increase in defense spending and
also to maintain a perceptible rise in living standards;
indeed many Soviet citizens believe that living stand-
ards have been declining over the past few years. If
defense outlays continue to rise at about 4 percent per
year as we now project, they would preempt about
two-thirds of annual increments to the gross national
product in 1990, as compared with one-fourth ‘now,
making leadership choices far more difficult. In par-
ticular, allocations to consumer industry, agriculture,
and transportation would inevitably suffer.

ower sources

Use of Imports From the West in
the Soviet Economy

15. As productivity gains dwindled in the 1970s,
Moscow looked increasingly to the West for technol-
ogy and equipment. The leadership's decision to back
Président Brezhnev’s program to upgrade the Soviet
diet further increased the USSR’s reliance on imports
from the West. Between 1970 and 1980 the value of
Soviet imports increased nearly eightfold (table 4), and
the volume fourfold. Purchases of machinery, ferrous
metal products, and foodstuffs—especially grain—
dominated the USSR’s import list. A large part of the
Soviet imports of capital goods was financed by West-
ern credits. As a result, the Soviet hard currency debt
service ratio increased from 9 percent in 1971 to 19
percent in 1977, leading to more cautious borrowing
Page-12
Table 4

Soviet Hard Currency Imports

 

Value of Imports

1980/1970 Percent of Total Imports

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Million Curreat US Dollars) Ratio
1970 1975 1980 1970 1975 1980
Grain tol 2,323 4,360 43.2 4 16 17
Other agricultural products $00 1,600 4,400 8.8 18 UW 17
Machinery . 927 4,592 6,039 65 x 33 23
Ferrous metals 279 2,565 3,469 124 10 18 13
Chemicals 209 Tat 1,565 1S 8 5 6
Other 692 2,436 6196 9.0 26 WwW 24
Total 2,708 14,257 26,029 96 100 100 100
(Million 1970 US Dollars)*
Grain 101 920 1,770 1s, 4 13 7
Other agricultural_ products 500 1,130 2,540 SAL 18 1s 2s
Machinery 927 2,700 2,350 25 34 37 23
Ferrous metals 279 1,030 1,330 48 10 14 13
‘Chemicals 209 460 580 28 8 6 6
Other 692 1,100 1,600 23° 26 1s 16
Total 2,708 7,340 10,170 38 100 100 100
* Estimated.

This table is Unclassified.

and import policies through the remainder of the

decade (table 5).

16. Despite difficulties in assimilating equipment,
imports from the West unquestionably helped the
Soviet leadership deal with major economic problems,
particularly in certain manufacturing sectors:

— In the 1970s, imported chemical equipment,
accounting for about one-third of all Western
machinery purchased by the Soviets, was largely
responsible for doubling the output of ammonia,
nitrogen fertilizer, and plastics and for tripling
synthetic fiber production.

— The Soviets could never have accomplished their
ambitious 15-year program of modernization and
expansion in the motor vehicle industry without
Western help. The Fiat-equipped VAZ plant, for
example, produced half of all Soviet passenger
cars when it came fully on stream in 1975, and
the Kama River truck plant, which is based

almost exclusively on Western equipment and
technology, now supplies nearly half of Soviet
output of heavy trucks.

” — Large computer systems and minicomputers of"
Western origin have been imported in large
numbers—1,800 systems since 1972—because
they (a) have capabilities that the Soviets cannot
match, (b) use complex software that the Soviets
have not developed, and (c) often are backed up
by expert training and support that the Soviets
cannot duplicate.

‘

17. At the same time, imports from the West
contribute in various ways to Soviet defense capa-
bilities:

— Some of the products of imported Western
equipment and technology are used by the
Soviet military—for example, trucks from the
Kama River production plant.
Page-13
Table 5

Soviet Hard Currency Debt

Million US Dollars at End of ‘Year

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

197t 1973 1975 1977 “1979 Projected
: 1981
Commercial debt 400 2,000 6.900 9,800 10,500 10,800
Government-backed debt 1,400 1,700 3,600 5,900 7,800 8,500
Gross debt 1,800 3,700 10,500 15,700 18,300 19,300
Assets with Western banks 1,200 2,600 3,100 4,500 8,800 7,000
Net debt 600 1,200 7,400 11,200, 9,500 12,200
Debt service 290 729 1,773 3,15 4,250 5,000
Debt service ratio* 9 10 16 19 15 17

 

*« Debt scrvice as percent of merchandise exports including arms and
gold sales.

a ic-Confidenti

.

— Certain imports facilitate the production of in-
puts for defense industries—for example, nu-
merically controlled machine tools, specialty
steels, and the facilities and technology to pro-
duce them.

— Finally, because most defense industries also
produce for the civilian economy (table 6), im-
ports of Western machinery for.the civilian
sector also help to prevent greater encroachment
of civilian requirements on defense production
facilities.

18. Imports from the West played an increasing
role in energy development in the 1970s because of
Soviet deficiencies in drilling, pumping, and pipeline
construction: .

— The USSR bought about $5 billion worth of oil
and gas equipment.

— By the beginning of the 1970s the Soviets had
settled on the gas-turbine-powered centrifugal
compressor as the basic equipment for their gas
transmission lines. When several domestic design
and production programs failed to produce suit-
able high-powered compressors, Moscow turned
to imports. .By the end of the decade, it had
ordered about 200 units at a cost of about $800
million.

 

19. At the same time, grain imports in the 1970s
averaged 14 million tons per year. Without Western
grain, Soviet consumers would not have had the
increase in meat consumption that they received in the
early 1970s, and the fall in per capita consumption of
meat would have been far worse in the late 1970s.

Soviet Benefits From Western Products in the 1980s

20. The resource bind facing the leadership suggests
that commercial relations with the West will be.even
more important to the USSR in the 1980s than in the
1970s. Needing large improvements to avoid a further
decline in the rate of economic growth, Soviet leaders
will give a high priority to imports of Western technol-
ogy and products to offset domestic shortfalls.

21, Although the USSR would benefit from in-
creases in imports from the West during the 1980s, it
may lack the necessary hard currency. With oil ex-
ports expected to decline,and exports of other major
exports, such as minerals and timber, barely holding
their own, the USSR's main sources of hard currency
will be sales of gas, gold, and arms, along with an
increase in debt to the West. The key to maintaining
even the current level of Soviet trade with the West
will be the Siberia-to-Europe (West Siberia) gas pipe-
line. If two lines are built, gas exports could amount to
$6-7 billion per year in the late 1980s, enough to repay
Page-14
4

 

Table 6

Relationships Among Soviet Defense
and Civilian Industries

 

Defense Industry Principal Civilian Lines Other Closely
at Final Assembly Plants Related Civilian
Producti

 

 

 

 

 

luction
Technolog!
Ballistic missiles Metal consumer goods, None
machine tools *
Acrodynamic Metal consumer goods, None
missiles excavating equipment
Fixed-wing com- Metal consumer goods, . None
bat aircraft parts for agricultural
machinery
Fixed-wing sup- Civilian transport air- ‘None
port aircraft craft, metal consumer
goods, hand tools
Helicopters Civilian rotary-wing air- None
craft, metal consumer
goods
Naval surface Merchant and fishing Pumps, machine
ships > ships, chemical storage tools, mining
tanks, parts for transpor-  oquipment
tation and agricultural
machinery
Submarines Merchant ships, oil Pumps, machine
lines, parts for transpor-' tools, mining
tation and agricultural equipment
machinery .
Tanks Railroad rolling stock Construction and
” and locomotives transportation
co 7 “equipment
Other armored Agricultural machinery Construction and
vehicles transportation
equipment
Actillery Agricultural machinery,
motors, and machine
tools

 

 

* One ballistic missile plant produces civilian machine tools.
* One surface-to-air missile plant produces excavating equipment.

Thi eS

quickly the funds advanced by Westérn. Europe and
Japan and to finance rising levels of imports. Agree-
ment on the gas pipeline would also encourage West-
ern participation in other major projects, providing
additional sources of credit.

Potential Impact on the USSR of Western
Restrictions on Trade and Technology

22. Western restrictions on economic relations with
the USSR could take a variety of forms including

controls on: strategic technology; credits; nonstrategic
trade; and Western imports from the USSR.

Controls on Strategic Technology

23. Existing controls have denied to the USSR very
powerful computers but have not prevented the Sovi-
ets from illegally acquiring embargoed semiconductor
production machinery. In addition, many types of
small computers useful for research and development,
including military R&D, are available at the discretion
of the exporting country. An extended COCOM list
would affect both civilian and military industries but
would have little impact on critical military technol-
ogies which are already controlled.

24. Expanded controls would force the USSR to
make even greater use of non-COCOM suppliers and
illegal channels. This would result in higher costs and
delays but would probably not prevent the acquisition
of high-priority items. Since the USSR uses Eastern
Europe as an illegal conduit for hard-to-trace technol-
ogy, the value of any extension of the COCOM list
would be seriously weakened if Eastern Europe were
not covered.

Limits on Credits

25. Comprehensive Western sanctions on new cred-
its, both governmental. and. private, would impose
significant hardships on the USSR. Soviet hard curren-
cy earnings are likely to decline, at least through the
mid-1980s, before the West Siberian pipeline can be
completed. The extent of the decline will depend
mainly on Soviet export earnings from gold, weapons,
and oil. To maintain hard currency imports at recent
levels and pay interest on existing debt, Moscow will
have to increase its hard currency debt—perhaps
rapidly. Curtailing Western credits would force a
marked reduction of Soviet hard currency imports
within two or three years. US action alone to limit

credits would not be effective.
q

Controls on Nonstrategic Trade

26. A complete halt on shipment of agricultural
commodities from COCOM countries and Australia
would reduce Moscow's imports of grain and grain
products by more than 70 percent and cut meat and
butter imports far more. If the USSR could buy no
grain after 1981, average annual meat production
Page-15
would be cut by about 2 caillion tons. An embargo on
meat added to the grain embargo would reduce per
capita availability of meat by roughly 20 percent. The
impact of a unilateral US food embargo would be
small and short lived.

27. Large steel imports will be needed for the
foreseeable future. Denial of all large-diameter pipe
exports to the USSR would severely undercut Soviet
plans to boost natural gas production. A US denial by
itself would be meaningless because Western Europe
and Japan account for all Soviet imports of large-
diameter pipe (the USSR is a significant export market
for these countries). {f the Soviets are to reduce
dependence on imports of Western specialty steels,
they must have Western metallurgical technology. The
French are helping to build the important Novolipetsk
steel plant—which, when completed in the 1980s, will
produce about 7 million tons of specialty steels per
year.

"98. With the exception of molybdenum and steel,
the USSR depends on the West for little of its mineral
and metals requirements. Although US producers and
their subsidiaries in South America are the major
suppliers of molybdenum, the Soviets could easily
purchase molybdenum through multiple brokers and
set up dummy corporations in non-Communist coun-
tries. The Soviets buy some tin, cobalt, tungsten, and
bauxite through Western metals dealers, but the bulk
of Soviet purchases are made directly from less devel-
oped countries.

29. The suspension of all contracts and imposition
of a total, effective, and sustained multilateral CO-
COM embargo on exports of oil and gas equipment to
the USSR and Eastern Europe would substantially
retard Soviet energy development, and its impact
would increase over at least the next decade. Western

. pipe and compressors for transporting gas, high-capac-

ity pumps for oil wells, and advanced exploration
equipment could not be replaced for many years. The
losses in oil and gas production could amount to 2-3
million barrels a day in oil equivalent in the middle
and late 1980s, of which the larger part would be gas.
The impact of a unilateral US embargo would again be
much smaller and short lived.

80. A decline in oil production, coupled with a
much smaller increase in gas production than is now
expected, would have substantial consequences for the
Soviet economy. Hard currency earnings could fall

sharply, and economic growth would probably be even
slower than the rate of 2 percent or less which we now
expect.

Boycott of Soviet Exports

81. Western-imposed controls.on, imports from the
USSR would cut the USSR’s hard currency earnings
substantially. The bulk of Moscow's exports consist of
energy and other raw materials most suited for sale to
developed Western markets and not easily marketed
in the less developed countries. Moscow could replace
some lost sales to the European oil market with
stepped-up sales to the Third World, particularly if
favorable terms were offered. Natural gas could not be
sold elsewhere. LDC demand for other ‘exports—
chemicals, timber, metals, and minerals—is small.

Soviet Leadership Response
to a Western Embargo

82. The Soviets do not believe—particularly in light
of their experience with Western sanctions after the
Afghanistan invasion—that an effective economic em-
bargo is either likely or sustainable. Their initial
reponse to an embargo would probably be an attempt
to break it up by playing up to participating countties
thought to be weak links. Sustained Western economic
warfare against the USSR would make Moscow more
truculent in its foreign policy. Such actions would also
remove some of the economic considerations that
Moscow must confront in dealing with current and
potential crisis situations.

33. With respect to economic policies, a broadly
based embargo would force a more autarkic approach.
The Western reaction to Afghanistan, in fact, has
already moved the leadership in this direction. In
addition, some Soviet leaders are worried about exces-
sive dependence on the West, and others are disap-
pointed that imports from the West have not made a
greater contribution to Soviet productivity. Western
economic pressure would thelp rally the leadership
around a course of self-reliance and would provide it
with a pretext for soliciting public support to imple-
ment this turn in development strategy. Western
policy would be used at the same time to justify
lowering consumer expectations and the need for
continued economic sacrifices.

34. Although an effective embargo would narrow
the range of choices available to the leadership, it
Page-16
j
!

 

 

would force the Politburo to deal with several painful
choices regarding resource allocations that the Brezh-
nev regime has avoided. No easy, risk-free solutions
are readily available. At least initially, the regime is
almost certain to maintain the high priority that the
military has enjoyed. The tense international atmos-
phere and the more assertive US defense posture
would politically disarm any leader who might advo-
cate a reduction in growth of military expenditures.
The high priority accorded agriculture and consump-
tion under Brezhnev, on the other hand, is likely to be
questioned. Eventually growing economic problems
may spur consideration of radical changes in allocation
of resources between the civilian and military sectors
and in the system of economic management, but such
changes are even less likely to be adopted in an
environment of East-West confrontation.

Conclusions
Impact on the Soviet Economy

35. Although the Western states, acting together,
have the potential to impose severe economic costs on
the USSR, their ability to gain political leverage is
circumscribed by two factors. First, the Soviet econo-
my is large and self-sufficient enough to support the
main thrust of its current military and foreign policies
in spite of any embargo the West might implement.
Second, a Western embargo must contend with the
ability of the USSR to circumvent COCOM restric-
tions through illegal acquisitions or imports from non-
COCOM countries.

86. The impact of Western restrictions could range
from minimal to substantial. A unilateral US denial
policy—whether focused on strategic technology, ma-
chinery, or grain—would have little impact. There are
too many alternative sources of supply available to the
USSR. At the other extreme, a total Western embargo

 

on trade with the Soviet Union with minimal circum-
vention would probably cause a drop in GNP in the
short term and slower economic growth in the long
term and force very hard choices on the leadership
with regard to domestic resource decisions.

 

87. A total and effective trade embargo would
create deeper and earlier energy imbalances than we
now foresee. Faced with a total cutoff of Western
trade, the leadership would be likely to adopt domestic
economic policies restricting private consumption se-
verely in order to protect essential investment sources
and to allow for growth in defense spending. As a
result, living standards could actually begin to fall.
Lower consumption levels in turn would increase
popular dissatisfaction and hinder leadership attempts
to raise productivity. .

Impact on Soviet Military Power

88. There is little chance that Western economic
sanctions, even if comprehensive and sustained, could
markedly affect Soviet military power for the better
part of a decade. The Soviet response to such drastic
Western actions would almost certainly be to raise
even more the priority of defense programs in the
allocation of resources. Should a weakening of the
industrial base force some cuts. in_military programs,
this would not happen quickly and the effects on
overall Soviet military capabilities would be very
gradual.

39. The main impact of Western economic -sanc---~-- -- }-
tions would be to slow qualitative improvements in
Soviet weapon systems. Given the time required to
develop new or significantly modified weapon sys-
tems, the denial of Western technology would not
have a major impact until the late 1980s and a
maximum impact until the 1990s and beyond.
Page-17
SRa Ale, 4 enmnaee 9

Neem Stitt 5

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

 

|. This document was disseminated by. the National Foreign Assessment Center. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his or her jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the following
officials within theic respective departments:

a. Director of fatelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence’ Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of Defense
and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ‘
¢. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, for the Department of the Army
d. Director of Naval atelligence, for the Department of the Navy
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, tatelligence, for the Department of the Air Force
f. Director of latelligence, for Headquarters, Marine Corps
9. Deputy Assistant Secretory for International Intelligence Analysis, for the Depart-
ment of Energy
h. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
i. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
i. Special Assistant to the Secretary for Notional Security, for the Department of the
Treasury
k. The Deputy Director for National Foreign Assessment for ‘any other Department or
Agency .
2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with cpplicable
security regulations, or returned to the National Foreign Assessment Center.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it for a
Period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document should be destroyed
‘or returned to the forwarding agency, or Permission should be requested of the forwarding
agency to retain it in accordance with {AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text isGOMRIDGATidde