
Page-1
COPY NO. ~ 160°
Cel Ao!

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM ©2047
RELEASE IN FULL
DIFFICULTIES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION
ABROAD OF POINT FOUR

 

    

 

Auth:
ORE 54-49 _
atet

 

 

 

Published 13 June 1949

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

 

eben
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

bd. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army
ce, Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with

applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board

SONSIDENTEAL
Page-3
DIFFICULTIES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION ABROAD OF POINT FOUR

SUMMARY

Vigorous implementation of the Truman
program of granting technical assistance and
encouraging capital investment in underde-
veloped areas will promote economic develop-
ment, raise living standards, combat the ap-
peal of Communism, and promote the spread
of US methods and influence. This program
will, however, encounter certain obstacles
which, if not surmounted, could limit its suc-
cess.’ While these obstacles are inherent in
any such undertaking and none of them is of
such critical importance as to cripple the pro-
gram, their cumulative impact could be suf-
ficient to hamper full achievement of its
broad aims. The most serious problem will
be to counteract the tendency of recipient
countries to lose sight of the technical aspect
of the program and attempt to convert it into
a world-wide “Marshall Plan” involving huge
capital grants. Many nations will be less in-
terested in technical aid for public health, re-
sources surveys, and overhauling of financial
systems than in grandiose and unrealistic de-
velopment projects for which they will expect
US Government financial as well as technical
aid. Unless it is made clear that Point Four

*This paper seeks to present some of the over-all
Problems, arising from conditions and attitudes
abroad, which will be encountered in the imple-
mentation of Point Four.. It purposely adopts a
broad general approach, and is to be considered
only as a preface to possible future analyses of
specific area and functional problems as the Point
Four Program takes shape. For the purposes of
this paper “underdeveloped areas” are assumed to
be those whose natural and human resources are
largely untapped, primarily the dependent areas
and young states of Asia, Africa, and much of
Latin America. While more highly developed coun-
tries like those of Western Europe will also have
underdeveloped sectors of their economies, the prob-
lems outlined here apply more directly to the eco-
nomically backward areas.

is primarily a technical aid program and not
something on the order of the ERP, many
inadequately considered schemes will have to
be rejected, and the consequent disappoint-
ment of the nations rebuffed will be detri-
mental to US interests. Another problem will
be the probable competition for aid priorities
between various nations and groups of na-
tions, all of them seeking preferential treat-
ment in the allocation of the limited aid
available.

Subsequent implementation of technical
aid, through foreign private investment, will
meet some opposition from local nationalists
who fear foreign “exploitation,” from local
commercial interests afraid of foreign compe-
tition, from political groups desirous of em-
barrassing their.governments, and from local
Communist groups which will exploit the sit-
uation. Many governments will prefer to as-
sure their own control of development proj-
ects and to avoid foreign “exploitation” by
acquiring financial aid on a government-to-
government basis rather than through pri-
vate investment. These countries may insist
upon restrictions on foreign capital so oner-
ous as to prevent any substantial flow of pri-
vate funds.

Another obstacle to success of the program
will be the unwillingness or inability of many
recipients to utilize technical assistance ef-
fectively. Local apathy, official corruption,
bureaucratic inefficiency, and local national-
ist resentment may combine in some areas to
resist foreign missions and advisers and to
make it difficult to carry out their recom-
mendations. Use of the “servicio” method in
Latin America, where US technicians have
been in charge of aid programs under a min-
istry of a foreign government has, however,
had encouraging success in overcoming this
type of obstacle.

Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Navy, and the Air Force
have concurred in this report; the Intelligence Division, Department of the Army, had
no comment. The report is based on information available to CIA as of 1 June 1949.

CONTTBENTIAL 1

!
|
|
|
|
|
Page-4
CONBEBEITIAL 2

The planned execution of much of the pro-
gram through the United Nations will have
the advantages of: (1) utilizing existing UN
machinery; (2) strengthening the prestige of
the UN; and (3) giving the program a truly
international aspect, thus minimizing US lia-
bility to charges of “imperialism.” On the
other hand, the US will have less control
over the program, and some UN specialized
agencies and regional economic commissions
may seek to undertake programs more am-
bitious than the US, which will have to sup-
ply the bulk of the resources, is willing to
support. Moreover, such UN programs will

tend to be influenced by political considera-
fions, perhaps leading to an effort to distrib-
ute benefits evenly among members rather
than on the basis of need. Nevertheless, the
US will still exercise considerable indirect con-
trol through its influence over other UN mem-
bers and since it is the only country capable
of supplying most of the required funds.
While the USSR will bitterly attack the
Truman program as US “imperialism” and
seek to obstruct it on the same basis as the
ERP, Soviet capabilities of impeding the pro-
gram are relatively limited. The USSR will
probably prohibit Satellite participation.

CONFIDENTIAL
Page-5
CONPEDENTIAL

DIFFICULTIES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION ABROAD OF POINT FOUR

As the fourth point of his inaugural ad-
dress, President Truman announced a “bold
new program” designed to extend technical
assistance and foster the flow of capital
investment to underdeveloped countries
through a “cooperative enterprise in which
all nations work together through the United
Nations and its specialized agencies wherever
practicable.” Merely granting technical as-
sistance and encouraging capital investment
abroad are not new undertaking for the US
Government, which has engaged in this type
of activity through the Export-Import Bank,
the Interdepartmental Committee on Scien-
tific and Cultural Cooperation, the Institute
of Inter-American Affairs, and various bilat-
eral arrangements; but the expanded and co-
ordinated program now proposed as a. major
instrument of national policy is a far-reach-
ing innovation. The two aspects of the pro-
gram, technical assistance and private
foreign investment, are designed to be com-
plementary, with the technical aid providing
the necessary groundwork and opening
the way to privately financed development
projects. |

The economic, political, and social effects
of a vigorously implemented program would
be of major benefit to the United States.
Since the US would be called upon to pro-
vide the bulk of the capital, skilled person-
nel, technological training and guidance in-
volved, the program would inevitably result
in the spread of US machinery and methods
to the countries aided, thus forming closer
ties with the US, economically, socially, and
Politically. The effective implementation of
a technical assistance program of broad scope
Would also raise world living-standards, thus
encouraging political stability. Such pro-
gressive improvement of world stability offers
one method of combatting the expansion of
Communism.

Certain difficulties will arise in the imple-
mentation of the program, however, which if
not properly coped with, will hinder success-

ful aphievement of these objectives. This
estimate seeks to examine these probable dif-
ficulties rather than to attempt any evalua-
tion of the prospects of the program as a
whole.”

1. Attempts To Change the Character
of the Program.

Although the underdeveloped areas and the
European powers which control many of them
have received the President’s proposal with
enthusiasm, their later reactions as the pro-
gram develops will raise numerous compli-
cating problems. Chief among these will be
the attempt of many areas to shift the pro-
gram’s emphasis from technical aid to finan-
cial assistance from the US Government and
to propose grandiose and impracticable proj-
ects. In the first place, enthusiasm will in
many cases outrun wisdom and numerous
governments will tend to consider this the
opportunity for realizing cherished develop-
ment projects with little or no regard for
over-all world needs or the resources avail-
able for implementation of the most urgent
programs. This type of reaction has already
manifested itself in the nebulous proposals for
loan assistance made by numerous countries
to the International Bank and the US Export-
Import Bank.

In addition to advancing unrealistic and
exorbitant requests for technical aid, many
governments will seek to turn the emphasis
of the program from technical to financial
assistance on the order of the European Re-
covery Program. The vision of substantial
foreign financial backing will prove much
more alluring to prospective beneficiaries
than the reception of advisory and training
missions. The point will be raised that for

 

*More extended analyses of many of these prob-
lems and proposed measures for meeting them are
contained in policy papers prepared by the De-
partment of State Technical Assistance Working
Group (TAG) and the Interdepartmental Advisory
Committee on Technical Assistance (ACTA).

CONFIDENTIAL 3
Page-6
certain types of development projects tech-
nical assistance and capital imports will have
to be simultaneous, that foreign technicians
must have the machinery with which to in-
struct local personnel and carry out their
plans. This attitude has already appeared in
the UN Economic and Social Council where
the Lebanese representative asked logically
whether granting technical aid before capital
goods might not prove “wasteful and frus-
trating.” The fact that many types of .as-
sistance such as technical missions and eco-
nomic surveys will themselves create a need
for capital investment to implement them
will be utilized as a further argument for
stressing the financial aspect of Point Four.
If such technical aid is given without first
ascertaining whether capital is available, the
result is likely to be increased pressure for
US financing. An additional argument for
immediate financial assistance will be that
many economic surveys of various kinds have
already been completed and that the real need
is not for more surveys by technical experts
but for money to put existing plans into ef-
fect. Some local governments may not un-
derstand the necessity for creating a favor-
able climate for foreign private investment or
Xecal capital which under the Truman pro-
gram is to be relied upon to implement de-
velopment projects; they may instead seek
GS governmental financial aid.

Another probable development after the
peagram has been put into action will be a
gvowing disappointment on the part of cer-
tsin governments that so few tangible results
sre immediately evident. There will be a
uatural impatience for concrete evidence of
Proeress in the form of a higher standard of
Hvng, industrialization, and mechanized
sgieulture. This tendency can be overcome
ea by emphasizing that this is a long-range
grreram with infinite potentialities which
ean be realized only over a period of time
@ring which active steps must be taken to
qeexcome old prejudices and institute reforms
which may require present sacrifices and in-
mawations,

Unless the US makes it unmistakably clear
thu the very beginning that Point Four is a
wemical aid program and not a multiple-

CONBEPENTTAL : 4

Marshall Plan, ultimate US rejection of many
impracticable schemes will cause disappoint-
ment in nations thus rebuffed and may even
produce unfavorable reactions toward the US.
Such developments could lead to a lowering
of US influence which might be reflected in a
more uncooperative attitude or even in the
exertion of minor pressures through restric-
tions on US business enterprises and trade.
Such resentment of US action might also
strengthen the propaganda position of local
Communist and pro-Soviet elements, and con-
sequently impede cooperation with the West.
Any such tendencies will be fully exploited by
the USSR to stimulate nationalism and a gen-
eral revulsion against international coopera-
tion. If the underdeveloped countries enter
into the Point Four Program with a clear un-
derstanding of its cooperative requirements
as well as its long-term aims and potentiali-
ties, the possibility of avoiding disillusion-
ment and consequent apathy will be greatly
enhanced and the way cleared for construc-
tive action.

2. Competition for Aid Priorities.

In view of the limited resources likely to
be available, another major problem in the
implementation of Point Four will be the com-
petition arising between nations and groups
of nations for priority in receiving assistance.
There will be a natural tendency for each
nation to try to get the maximum amount of
assistance for itself, and furthermore, in rela-
tion to Point Four there will not be, as was
the case with the ERP, the restraining’ in-
fluence of an overriding and urgent necessity
for cooperation as the alternative to economic
collapse. While a certain amount of such
competition will be a healthy indication of in-
terest in the technical aid program, failure
to satisfy simultaneously the demands of
Burma, India and Pakistan, for instance, may
result in resentment toward the US on the
part of the country or countries omitted.

In addition to the competition between in-
dividual nations for aid priorities, there may
emerge, with the development of the contem-
porary trend toward regionalism and the
strengthening of the UN regional commis-
sions, a competition between areas of the
world. The launching of the ERP has

eee eee.
Page-7
CODER HET TL, , 5

ight forth requests for similar programs
for, other parts of the world, and disappoint-
ent has been expressed in these areas over
jus neglect. Consequently the demand for an
Mslan ‘Marshall Plan” put forward in the
fourth session of the Economic Commission
for‘Asia and the Far East at Lapstone, Aus-
tralia, may be a forerunner of similar official
Tequests for regional development programs
Yor Africa, Latin America, and the Middle
Fast. The difficulties arising from this con-
flict between areas will be less pressing than
those arising from conflicting national claims,
however, since the present cohesiveness of re-
gional blocs is somewhat tenuous and will
tend to break down in the event that a par-
ticular nation sees its own prospects for as-
sistance threatened through its support of
the demands of other nations merely for the
sake of regional solidarity. National rivalries
and the dissimilarities of. economic patterns
within geographical areas will also have a di-
“ visive effect on the maintenance of unity
within these blocs.

Should competitive tendencies be allowed
to develop unchecked, they could negate the
possibility of a cooperative plan for economic
development, either by creating a bitter and
importunate atmosphere in which there would
not be agreement sufficient to implement any
plans or by the emergence of international
“log-rolling” which would expand programs of
assistance beyond the realm of practical action.

3. Local Opposition to Foreign “Ex-
ploitation.”

Any US-backed program of technical aid
and particularly of private financial assist-
ance will meet a certain amount of opposition
from local nationalistic elements fearing for-
eign “exploitation,” local commercial inter-
“ests afraid of US competition, political groups
desirous of embarrassing their governments,
and local Communist groups which will ex-
Ploit the situation. For example, many Asi-
atic countries harbor a lingering suspicion
that US interests are too closely linked with
those of the European colonial powers. Both
the Asiatic nations and numerous Latin
American states also fear a new economic
imperialism of the US itself. Such intensely

nationalistic states will be jealous of foreign
tutelage and may well place obstacles in the
way of any technical missions whose recom-
mendations diverge from their own national-
istic aims. Less opposition may be expected,
however, in the case of strictly technical as-
sistance in such fields as health and educa-
tion, where no substantial foreign investment
is involved.

A serious obstacle in a few areas such as
Burma and Malaya may be the local Com-
munist movement, which will actively resist
the penetration of US methods and influence.
Communist-dominated labor and youth move-
ments may be utilized for demonstrations,
strikes, and possibly even industrial sabotage
to discourage the US from granting assistance
and local governments from accepting it.
Once aid has been initiated, these tactics will
be used to resist the effective implementation
of Point Four.

That portion of the President’s program
which calls for financing economic develop-
ment through foreign private investment will
meet strong obstacles in some areas. The
growing nationalism in most underdeveloped
countries has everywhere brought with it an
increased distrust of foreign capital. Many
governments will prefer to assure their own
strict control of development projects and to
avoid foreign “exploitation” by acquiring
financial aid on a government-to-government
basis rather than through private means.
Moreover, many of these states will feel that
they can secure better terms from foreign gov-
ernments, where they can use political con-
siderations as bargaining points, than from
foreign private investors who are interested
primarily in economic returns.

Despite US assurances, Many countries will
hesitate to allow direct private foreign invest-
ment because of their fear that a large share
of the profits will leave the country and that
their resources will be exploited for foreign
benefit rather than for their own. Even
though the US continues to emphasize the
necessity of creating favorable conditions for
foreign investment, these countries may in-
sist upon arbitrary restrictions on foreign
private capital which may defeat the objec-
tives of the technical aid already received.

CONBERHRit L
Page-8
CQ ee, 6

Foreign private capital in turn will be re-
luctant to flow into areas where it runs the
risk of expropriation, must operate under
onerous restrictions, and is sharply limited in
the profits which it may extract. Moreover,
in those countries with a high degree of politi-
cal and economic instability, private capital
will be unwilling to invest. In such cases,
there will be great pressure for government-
to-government loans, and there will be little
incentive on the part of recipient govern-
ments to promote conditions necessary to at-
tract private capital if they feel assured of
the former.

4. Incapacity To Utilize Technical Aid_

Properly.

Since the success of the Truman program
will depend largely on the efforts of the recip-
ient countries themselves, a major obstacle
will be the unwillingness or inability of many
recipients to utilize technical assistance ef-
fectively. In many areas governmental apa-
thy, official corruption, the low level of gov-
ernmental efficiency, local nationalistic oppo-
sition, and sheer inertia will combine to defeat
in large measure the achievement of any con-
crete results from technical aid. Much of the
past US aid to China has encountered these
obstacles. Moreover, some recipients will be
unwilling to accept the type of technical as-
sistance proffered, preferring large-scale de-
velopment projects to the unpalatable neces-
sity of first initiating administrative, fiscal,
and tax reforms.

Maximum benefit can be derived from tech-
nical aid projects if each country involved
establishes an honest administration of the
Program. In many instances such adminis-
trations will have to be headed by for-
eign experts, since there will be no tech-
nically qualified local personnel available.
Such a method, however, may prove unpalat-
able to some governments. Since it would
tend to place control of funds and personnel
Selection beyond the reach of the local gov-
ernment, possibilities for graft and political
Patronage would be lost. In addition, the
necessity of employing foreign administrators
might be considered a blow to national pride.

Faced with this necessary but unpalatable sit-
uation, some states will wish to do the job
with poorly qualified local, and perhaps politi-
cal, appointees, while others may let -blue-
prints gather dust rather than accept foreign
supervision. Considerable success in over-
coming this type of opposition to foreign man-
agement has, however, been achieved in Latin
America where “Servicios” headed by US tech-
nicians have been established under govern-
mental ministries.

5. Relationship to the United Nations.

Should the Truman program be carried out
as planned, largely through the United Na-
tions and its specialized agencies, several
problems would arise. The UN already has
available the machinery for various types of
technical assistance, which the United States
will be under considerable pressure to’ use.
This course will have certain advantages.
Utilization of existing UN machinery will: (1)
diminish the necessity for creating new
agencies; (2) greatly strengthen the prestige
of the UN; and (3) minimize liability of the
US to charges of political interference and
manipulation; and lessen the fear of US “ex-
ploitation.” Channeling technical missions
and financial aid through the UN would give
the program a truly international aspect and
thus weaken the opposition of those national-
ist groups which fear US economic impe-
rialism. Communists who have repeatedly
branded the UN a tool of “Western reaction”
would not be deflected from attacking the pro-
gram but their charges would lose force with
non-Communist elements.

On the other hand, the major disadvantage
to the United States of operation through the
UN would be the decentralization of responsi-
bility and diminished US control of the over-
all effort. To be sure, the US could still exer-
cise some indirect control through its hold
over some UN members and through the fact
that it must provide the bulk of the resources.
Nevertheless, lack of direct US control over
UN agencies will permit the development of
such tendencies as some UN bodies have al-
ready shown to launch a large number of
projects with wholly inadequate attention to
the resources available. Moreover, UN pro-

GORPIDENTTAL
Page-9
CONFIDE PHL 7

grams will tend to be influenced by political
considerations, such as the effort to distribute
aid evenly among members, rather than on
the basis of need. Thus a certain amount of
“log-rolling” in the form of vote-trading
could be expected.

Consequently many impracticable schemes,
which would never be seriously considered if
the US controlled negotiations, will be given
the dignity and publicity of UN discussion;
and some projects approved in the UN may
involve excessive demands on the United
States for technicians, training facilities in
the US, and loans and capital goods. Many
of these demands will inevitably incorporate
features which the US will have to reject, and
these rejections will be attacked by the na-
tions affected and will be utilized by the USSR
to denounce the whole concept of technical
assistance as politically motivated and merely
a refined method of “capitalistic imperialism.”

6. Soviet Reaction to the Program.

The Soviet Union will strenuously oppose
any US-dominated program for technical as-
sistance to underdeveloped areas, since in-
creasing productivity and raising living stand-
ards by evolutionary methods will weaken
Communist influence and materially and mor-
ally fortify non-Communist parties and gov-

ernments. The Polish representative in the’

UN Economic and Social Council has indi-
cated the most probable future Soviet line by
his bitter denunciations of the program as a
US scheme designed to shape the “American
Century” through political maneuvering, prof-
iteering, and espionage.

Although the USSR can aggravate the many
difficulties inherent in such a world-wide en-
terprise, it has only limited capabilities for
impeding it. The initial Soviet objective will
Probably be to utilize its propaganda resources
in an attempt to block or discredit the whole
Program in its formative stage. Failing in
this, the USSR will then set out to neutralize
the potential effect of the program through
(1) propaganda; (2) obstructionism in the
UN; and (3) political agitation. Soviet prop-
aganda will undoubtedly seek to prove that
the actual motives of the US are: (1) to sus-
tain the capitalist system by securing profits

for American entrepreneurs and outlets for
surplus production; (2) to insure political
subjugation of independent nations; and (3)
to advance preparations for an aggressive war
against the USSR and the “New Democracies.”
The familiar labels of “dollar diplomacy” and
“dmperialist expansionism” will be liberally
applied, and small states will be warned
against opening their doors to economic pene-
tration and political subservience in the guise
of American technical and financial assist-
ance. Furthermore, attempts will be made
to split the Western Powers by portraying the
US as seeking to displace the colonial nations
in the exploitation of their dependencies.
Once the assistance program is in operation,
however, the USSR will be ready and willing
to participate in investigating commissions
sent out by the UN, in order not only to
thwart, if possible, constructive efforts of the
commissions, but also to obtain industrial and
military intelligence, give covert support to
local Communist organizations and national-
ist agitators, and pose as the defender of de-
pendent peoples.

The USSR can be expected to prohibit So-
viet Satellite participation in the program, as-
suming it will involve some type of penetra-
tion of the Soviet orbit. Although the USSR
would like to secure needed technical and
material assistance for its sphere and at the
same time reduce the benefits to non-Soviet
nations by draining off as much aid as pos-
sible, the Kremlin is not willing to pay the
price of lifting the curtain to foreign mis-
sions. In addition, the Soviet state cannot
afford to lose prestige by admitting the su-
periority of the capitalist world.

Another Soviet tactic may be to use the re-
cently formed Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance in a propaganda campaign to
counteract the Western program. Pointing to
its provisions for exchange of experience and
technical aid, and claiming that its member-
ship is open to any states subscribing to
“democratic” principles, the USSR may at-
tempt to neutralize the psychological benefits
of the US offer. The USSR cannot, however,
spare the resources for any program of more
substance than token gifts through Com-
munist parties.

CONETIDENTIAL

 

|
|
Page-10
a
E
5
g
4
&
q
gi
&
#
f
5
&
a
5
3
6
a
5

 

g
i
g
i
a
: