
Page-12
COPY NU.ah

- FOR THE assis
- FOR REPORTS 4

  

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

FUTURE DANUBE RIVER NAVIGATION
AND CONTROL

   

vax ie C\AHISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAW
RELEASE IN FULL =
| SSSR

320633
Page-13
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army
. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

sae o

>

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

      
 
  

WARNING

This document contains on affecting the national
defense of the United State® within the meaning of the
Espionage Act, 50 US.C., , as amended. Its trans-
Page-14
ORE 34-48

FUTURE DANUBE RIVER NAVIGATION AND CONTROL
SUMMARY

The question of international control of the Danube will again arise at a con-
ference on 30 July in Belgrade. A subject of international discussion since the Con-
gress of Vienna in 1815, the Danube has now become a factor in the East-West struggle
for control of Europe. The scheduled conference (which will implement a decision
by the Council of Foreign Ministers in 1946 to discuss navigation on the Danube) will
deal primarily with the question of freedom of navigation and the restoration of in-
ternational controls.

Since World War II, however, the Soviet Union has attained de facto economic, po-
litical, and military control over the Danube from Vienna to the Black Sea. The USSR
is thus in a position to eliminate the obstacles arising from international rivalry which
formerly retarded a unified development of the Danube and its resources. The Danube
can thus be expected to become increasingly important to the USSR both strategically
and economically.

In view of these prospects, the Soviet bloc at the forthcoming Danube conference
will not agree to any proposal which would weaken Soviet control over the area, despite
apparent concessions it may make to the Western position. Thus the USSR will agree
to international control, but will insist that only riparian states can have an effective
voice in such control. The Soviet Union will also agree to the principle of freedom of
navigation on the Danube for all states, but in practice will be able to use its political
and economic stranglehold over the Satellites to deny use of the Danube to non-riparian
vessels. The USSR will probably insist that only riparian military vessels be permitted
on the Danube.

Western success at the forthcoming conference, in establishing such controls as
may be feasible over eventual Soviet development of the valley’s full potential for mili-
tary aggression, will depend upon the extent to which the USSR desires to avoid a dead-
lock with the West on this issue. The Kremlin may fear that such a deadlock would
have an adverse effect on world public opinion and would block Soviet efforts to pene-
trate that part of the Danube currently under US control in Austria and Germany.

Note: The information in this report is as of 28 June 1948.
The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, and the Navy have concurred in
this report; the Air Intelligence Division, Air Intelligence Directorate, Department of the Air
Force, had no comment.
Page-15
FUTURE DANUBE RIVER NAVIGATION AND CONTROL

1, Tue Postwar DaNnuBE.

The problem of international control of the Danube, a subject of debate since the
Congress of Vienna in 1815, will once again be discussed at a conference scheduled for
30 July in Belgrade. Although the USSR and its Satellites gained effective control
after World War II over the major part of the river, the Western Powers were able in
1946 to obtain Soviet agreement to hold a Danubian conference! within six months
of ratification of the Satellite peace treaties.

Postwar Soviet control over the Danube has greatly increased its economic and
military potential because international rivalries which formerly prevented a unified
development of the river and its resources have been eliminated. The Soviet Union,
as undisputed master of the Danube from the Black Sea to Vienna, is in a position
to (a) supervise reconstruction of installations damaged during the war; (b) direct
the implementation of plans for flood control, channel improvements, and hydroelectric
development; (c) control the movement and direction of river commerce to its own
or its Satellites’ advantage; and (d) manipulate any river project in such a way that
it will be consistent with eventual Soviet military plans.

Western Power interest in the Danube, therefore, derives primarily from the river's
contribution under Soviet control to the Soviet war potential. The Western Powers are
also interested in the possibility of retaining a voice, however small, in Danubian affairs
in the hope of facilitating East-West trade for the benefit of Austria and Western Ger-
many.

2. ConrTripuTion To SovieT WaR POTENTIAL.
a. Economic. -

The Danube is an important trade route for traffic between the riparian states
in an area where overland communications are relatively underdeveloped. Before the
war, upstream traffic was nearly three times as heavy as downstream traffic, and con-
sisted primarily of shipments of raw materials from Rumania and Yugoslavia. The
principal downstream traffic consisted of heavy machinery, scrap iron, and other bulky
commodities from Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary. Although the dollar volume
of prewar traffic on the Danube was small compared with the total volume of goods
moving between these countries, shipment of the bulky and heavy machinery and raw
materials involved would have been far more expensive by land and would have seri-
ously taxed the limited rail and highway facilities in the area.

Realization of postwar plans for linking the Danube by. canals with the Baltic
and the Rhine, coupled with Communist efforts to industrialize the Satellite nations,
would enhance the importance of the Danube as an artery of communication. This

‘Participants at the conference will include the USSR, US, UK, France, the Ukraine, Rumania,
Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia. Austria will also participate as an observer.

i ffx
Page-16
importance, however, will depend upon the development of East-West relations and the
extent to which the Satellites will be permitted to trade with the nations of Western
Europe. If freedom of navigation on the Danube were to be restored and East-West
trade were to increase, much traffic between Eastern and Western Europe could be
profitably shipped via the Danube and the proposed canals. On the other hand, a de-
liberate Soviet curtailment in East-West trade would not result in a net decrease of
Danube traffic over prewar volume since Soviet emphasis on industrialization of the
Satellites and on increased inter-Satellite and Soviet-Satellite trade will result in a sub-
stantial increase in traffic on the Danube.

Full exploitation of the Danube’s water power would also contribute substan-
tially to the economic development of Eastern Europe. Prior to the assumption of
power in this area by the USSR, political disunity among the Danubian and Balkan
states prevented the execution of cooperative plans to use the Danube for the develop-
ment of hydroelectric power or for large-scale irrigation projects. Political conditions
are now ripe for cooperative projects intended to increase the production of hydroelectric
power and to reclaim, through irrigation, much land of only marginal value under pres-
ent conditions. Plans for such projects are currently being considered and, if imple-
mented, will greatly increase the industrial and agricultural potential of Eastern

Europe.

bv. Strategic.

Control of the Danube is a strategic necessity for military control of south-
eastern Europe but from the point of view of logistics, the Danube is both an asset and
a liability. Though the river itself can be used for the transport of military supplies
and for the maintenance of normal commercial traffic important to the prosecution
of a war, Danubian traffic in time of war is particularly vulnerable to attack by mines
dropped from the air. (Sweeping the Danube for mines is not only an arduous job,
put also one which is not particularly effective because of the difficulty of locating
mines which become buried in the muddy bottom or which change location with the
current.)

The Danube is also a natural barrier separating the Balkans (Yugoslavia, Bul-
garia, Albania, and Greece), Northern Italy, and most of Austria from the Soviet Union
and the other Satellites. As such, it would be of advantage to the USSR in a defensive
war in which Soviet forces had retreated beyond the Danube. Maintenance of lines of
supply across the Danube would be essential, however, for the support of Soviet forces
on the Adriatic and the Mediterranean. These lines in turn depend upon the Danube’s
rail and highway bridges, most of which were destroyed during the last war and would
be vulnerable to air attack in any future war. Although temporary pontoon bridges
could handle such military traffic, the destruction of the rail bridges across the Danube
would have a crippling effect on the entire southeastern European economy.

3. PROBABLE SOVIET POSITION AT THE CONFERENCE.

At the forthcoming conference in Belgrade, the USSR can be expected, in general,
to oppose any proposal which would threaten existing Soviet political, economic, and

sifher 2
Page-17
fier

 

military controls over the river. The USSR has apparently decided to try to obtain
international sanction of its de facto control over the Danube and may utilize the con-
ference to further its “peace offensive,” confident that it has nothing to lose.

The Western Powers will be represented by the US, UK, and France. Their con-
trol over the Danube is presently confined to physical possession of the German and
Austrian zones of occupation. UK and French membership on prewar international
Danube commissions will also provide these powers with a basis to propose a return to
the prewar status. However, the Soviet majority will be in a position to override any
Western proposal and thus the chief restraining infiuence on the Soviet bloc will be the
Kremlin’s fear of the reaction on world public opinion of an extreme Soviet stand.
Moreover, the Kremlin may fear that a complete break with the Western Powers would
prolong indefinitely the existing barrier to Danube traffic at the border of the US-Soviet
zones of Austria. (See Appendix IV.) The maintenance of this barrier would hamper
East-West trade (which continues to be as important to the East as to the West) and
would block Soviet designs to obtain greater control over Austrian shipping facilities.

The USSR, therefore, will probably take the official position that (a) the Danubian
regime as set up by the Versailles Treaty is invalid.and that an entirely new adminis-
tration of the Danube must be organized; (b) only riparian states have the right to be
represented on any international Danubian administration; and (c) there should be
freedom of commercial navigation on the Danube for all states, but non-riparian mili-
tary vessels should be excluded.

Although the USSR has permitted Austria to attend the conference as an observer,
the Soviet bloc will probably vote against including Austria in the new body at this
time. Such a position would postpone the admission of Austria until after the con-
clusion of the peace treaty. Depending upon the terms of the treaty and the extent
of Soviet control over Austria at that time, the USSR could then decide whether it would
be in the Soviet interest to permit Austrian participation in the administration of the
Danube.

The Soviet bloc will almost certainly agree at the conference to the adoption of
a resolution calling for freedom of navigation on the Danube for ships of all nations.
Such a broad agreement to the principle of free navigation, however, will have no prac-
tical results unless specific measures are adopted designed to overcome the existing
military, political, and economic controls exercised by the USSR and its Satellites. In
practice, these controls enable the USSR to prevent navigation on the Danube by non-
riparian vessels. The dominant position of the Soviet Danube fleet and of the joint
Soviet-Satellite shipping companies permits the USSR to enforce preferential schedules
and rates which would prevent profitable operation by non-riparian companies. More-
over, all important port and repair facilities are under direct or indirect Soviet control
and consequently non-riparian vessels can be denied their use. Military control of the
greater part of the Danube will also remain in Soviet hands and non-riparian vessels
can be discouraged from using the Danube by the onerous military regulations con-
trolling passage on the Danube by non-riparians.

3 soften
Page-18
sages

APPENDIX I
INTERNATIONAL CONTROL OF THE DANUBE

1. Prewar.

The principle of international control of the Danube has been recognized for many
years. International control was necessitated by the need for (1) insuring freedom of
navigation for vessels of all countries; (2) maintaining the river in navigable condition;
(3) obtaining uniformity in rules and regulations concerning the movement of ships;
and (4) undertaking tasks regarding development of the river which were beyond the
scope of any individual riparian.

International administration of the Danube prior to World War II was the re-
sponsibility of the European Danube Commission (CED), which had jurisdiction over
the maritime Danube only, and of the International Danube Commission (CID), which
concerned itself only with the fluvial Danube. The legal right of these two organizations
to reassume their prewar status is currently being disputed by the USSR.

Although the principle of freedom of navigation on international rivers was estab-
lished at the Congress of Vienna in 1815, it was not until 1856 that the European Danube
Commission (CED) came into being. CED was authorized to keep the Danube mouth
in navigable condition, provide pilotage for ocean-going vessels entering and leaving
the Danube, and enforce freedom of navigation for vessels of all nations. The original
members of CED included Austria, France, Great Britain, Prussia, Russia, Sardinia, and
Turkey. Various changes in membership occurred until in 1921 Great Britain, France,
Italy, and Rumania were the only member states. At that time, a statute was passed
stipulating that CED could not terminate its activities except by unanimous approval
of the member states. The CED's powers were reduced in 1938 when Rumania estab-
lished an autonomous organization—the Maritime Danube Commission (DDM)—to
maintain the maritime channel of the Danube. CED was still empowered to provide
pilotage and enforce free navigation. By 1939, Nazi Germany had also pressured itself
into membership in the CED.

Prior to 1919, administration of the fluvial Danube was localized, unorganized,
and spotty, with each riparian state maintaining virtual autonomy in the administra-
tion of its section of the Danube. Establishment in 1919 of the International Danube
Commission (CID) still failed to create a truly international administration. The
CID ? was primarily a supervisory and coordinating body to watch over the application
of basic international law as it affected navigation on the Danube. It had powers of
review over all plans for river construction which might affect navigation. Uniform
regulations for river police and navigation were made by the Commission but were
actually approved, initiated, and carried out by the riparian states. The Commission’s

» Members of the CID included France, UK, Italy, Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia,
Hungary, Bulgaria, and Rumania,

safer 4
Page-19
f

authority also extended to the navigable portions of the Danube tributaries which
traversed more than one country and to the river’s lateral canal system. CID’s admin-
istrative decisions could be appealed to the League of Nations or the Court of Inter-
national Justice.

2. Postwar.

Shortly after the outbreak of World War II, Germany dissolved the CID and estab-
lished a Council of the Fluvial Danube in September 1940. Great Britain and France
were excluded from the Council, although the Soviet Union was a member from early
1941 until the German invasion of the USSR. In 1942, Germany also dissolved CED
and compelled Rumania to accept German representatives in the DDM.

Since the war, the powers represented at the London Conference on European
Transport in 1944, (USA, UK, USSR, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Norway, Yugo-
slavia, and Greece) initially declared Germany’s dissolution of CID and CED as invalid
and recognized the continued existence of the prewar commissions. Subsequently, the
USSR insisted that all reference to the Danube be stricken from the final agreements.
Meanwhile, the USSR occupied the Danubian area and itself once again became a ri-
parian state through the acquisition of Bessarabia. The USSR thus effectively con-
trols all but 302 miles of the navigable Danube. The outcome of the international con-
ference agreed to by the Council of Foreign Ministers in December 1946 will determine
whether or not CED and CID will resume their prewar functions. Meanwhile, these
functions are being carried out by the USSR and the riparian states.
Page-20
; sey

APPENDIX II
PHYSICAL CONDITION OF THE DANUBE

Unusual drought conditions during the past few years, neglected dredging during
and after the war, submerged vessels and bridges, and the existence of mines laid dur-
ing the war have greatly interfered with the navigability of the Danube during the
postwar period.

1. Fruvian Danuse.

a. Water Level.

Several years of extremely dry weather reached a climax in the summer of
1947 when the water level of the Danube fell to a record low of 44 inches below normal.
This caused a complete halt in river traffic for several weeks in sections such as the
Iron Gate and the area between Bratislava and Komarno in Czechoslovakia. Other
areas seriously affected by the low water level included: (1) the Corabia-Turnu Ma-
gurele and the Calarasi-Harsova sectors in Rumania where there are extensive alluvial
deposits and sand banks; (2) the section of the Danube south of Dunafoldvar in Hun-
gary; (3) the area immediately north of Belgrade in Yugoslavia. In order to traverse
these sections barges had to reduce their usual cargo weight to one-third. The river
started to rise in December, however, and by January 1948 it was normal.

The difficulties arising from the low water level were aggravated by accumula-
tion of silt resulting from inadequate dredging during the past few years. In some
areas, however, the authorities took advantage of the low water to begin dredging ac-
tivities. In the Mohov channel between the Yugoslav ports of Vukovar and Becka
Palanka the river bed was leveled and cleaned out. Dredging was carried on in the
Hungarian sector of the Danube although some of the channels which require con-
stant attention are still unusable. The Soviets also sought the aid of the Czechoslovaks
in having the Hungarian and Slovak sides of the Danube dredged.

Aided by the unusually mild weather, navigation on the lower Danube continued
throughout the winter 1947-48, although ice prevented navigation in the upper reaches
of the river.

b. War Damages.

Although the USSR announced in October 1945 that the Danube was clear for
navigation from Tulln to the Black Sea, traffic is still very slow, often moving in only
one direction at a time because of the narrowness of the cleared channel. Pilots are
still necessary in many places. In July 1947, an observer reported at least 50 sub-
merged ships and barges between Braila, Rumania, and Komarom, Hungary. The re-
moval of the greatest obstacle in the upper Danube, the wrecked Tulln bridge 30 miles
above Vienna, left the river clear as far south as Komarom. Although most wrecked
bridges have been removed, the following serious hindrances remain: (1) the railway

suffer 6
Page-21
suffer

bridges at Novi Sad, Yugoslavia, and Baja, Hungary; (2) the road bridge at Dunafoldvar,
Hungary; and (3) the Ujpest railway bridge and several road bridges in Budapest.

c. Mine Danger.

During 1944 the British laid 1,500 mines in the Danube between Giurgiu and
Bratislava; the Germans, Soviets, and Rumanians also laid many mines. The river
was swept by Soviet occupation authorities right after the war but danger from float-
ing mines and those located in coastal and shallow waters still exists. The Soviets and
the riparian states have expressed their concern over this condition and have made
plans for cooperative efforts in mine-sweeping operations in 1948. During 1947 at least
three vessels were blown up in Rumanian waters above Giurgiu despite several sweepings
by Rumanians in the summer of 1947, and in February 1948 a mine exploded near
Corabia. Several Soviet vessels ran into mines at Esztergom, Hungary, which caused
the Soviets to order that each ship traveling between Komarom and Budapest be de-
magnetized.

Soviet/Satellite efforts to free the Danube of mines is reflected by: (1) a Soviet
request on 20 November 1947 that the Rumanians resume mine-sweeping activities;
(2) a 1 December 1947 Yugoslav proposal to the Rumanian Government for cooperative
mine-sweeping activities along the common Yugoslav-Rumanian stretch of the Danube;
and (3) a Rumanian recommendation that the Yugoslav Navy sweep the river between
Bazias (northern point on joint Yugoslav-Rumanian border) and Orsova (which is just
below the Iron Gate), the Rumanian Navy sweep the section from Orsova to Gruia and,
with the assistance of the Bulgarian Navy, sweep the portion from Gruia (at the Yugo-
slav-Bulgarian border) to Giurgiu. It was reported in April 1948 that Soviet mine-
Sweepers were also taking part in sweeping activities in Yugoslav waters. During
December 1947 Czechoslovakia and the USSR completed negotiations for opening the
Danube to traffic on a larger scale. The USSR agreed to clear the 72 miles of the
Czechoslovak Danube in the spring of 1948. The Czechs will meet the cost up to
15,000,000 kes ($300,000) of the operation which the Soviets assert will take 1,000 of
their Danube fleet personnel three weeks to complete. The Czechs will not be re-
sponsible for losses suffered by the USSR during the sweep and the USSR will not be
responsible for losses after it is completed. Unless similar arrangements are being made
between the USSR and the other riparians, it is unlikely that the Danube can be cleared
of mines during 1948. Sweeping will have to be continued for some years in order to
remove mines buried in sand bars or lodged in shallow banks. Moreover, the USSR
can be expected to use the presence of mines as an additional pretext to prevent or at
least control all traffic by non-riparian states.

2. Maritime DaNnusBE.

Ever since the European Danube Commission chose to maintain the Sulina branch
of the Danube delta as the channel for ocean-going vessels, constant dredging has been
required to keep it open. The Sinaia Agreement of 1938 entrusted the technical aspects
of maintaining the channel to the Danube Maritime Administration (DDM), an auton-

7 syfter
Page-22
sugffer

omous Rumanian organization. Since early 1946 the DDM has been operating under
the jurisdiction of the Rumanian Department of Ports and Waterways of the Ministry
of Communications. Since 1 July 1946, the DDM has been absorbed by the Department
of Ports and Waterways. Although handicapped by inadequate equipment, coal and
fuel oil shortages, and lack of funds, the Rumanians have nevertheless been able to:
(a) maintain the Sulina channel at 25 feet; (b) extend the northern breakwater by 328
feet; (c) extend the channel?! from 27 to 31 miles from the mouth; (d) dredge 3,412,782
cubic feet of silt over a length of 2,461 feet and a width of 164 feet.

Since the USSR re-acquired Bessarabia in 1944, it has assumed complete control
of the Chilia branch of the Danube delta, which now forms the Soviet-Rumanian bound-
ary. Although this branch is not navigable by sea-going vessels,? it does receive 67
percent of the Danube water. Most of this water goes through the Stary Stamboul, the
southernmost of the Chilia Delta streams, and deposits a large quantity of silt around
the Sulina mouth. The Soviets have thus far barred the Rumanian technicians from
this area. Consequently, the Rumanians have been unable to make the periodic sur-
veys of the area directly north of the breakwaters protecting the Sulina mouth, which
must be made to determine what dredging and technical work should be done.

A 10-mile mine field at Sulina mouth has handicapped dredging and shipping ac-
tivities, although a channel has been swept to Serpilor Island. Pilots are required on
all vessels entering Sulina mouth. Sulina channel and the Maritime Danube are well
marked with buoys, lighthouses, and mile markers. Wrecks and sandbars are clearly
marked.

One solution of the problem of keeping the Sulina branch open is to divert the Stary
Stamboul stream into one or more of the northern branches of the Chilia delta. Such
a step would protect the Sulina mouth from the silt now threatening it. Work on this
was started in 1943 and the USSR may, in its own self-interest, dredge the Oceakov
channel for small vessels that ply between Odessa and Danube river ports.

Some Rumanian technical experts recommend the construction of another channel
from the Sulina arm to the Black Sea which would allow ships to enter at a point 5%
miles to the south of the present mouth. Plans for this were drawn up in 1937. It was
reported in October 1947 that work on this project was underway. Although sugges-
tions have also been made for opening the St. George branch of the Danube delta for
ocean-going vessels, this is not considered feasible. The construction of a canal from
Cernavoda to Constantza has also been proposed. Such a project. would eliminate Ru-
manian dependence on the USSR for maintenance of the maritime Danube and would
shorten the distance between the fluvial Danube and the Black Sea by 155 miles.

1 This channel is protected by two walls which are 8 feet under normal water level and which reduce
the accumulation of silt.

* Unsuccessful attempts by the Soviets in 1940 to open the Chilia branch which is only 5 feet deep
at the mouth proved that this could not be done without the construction of permanent jetties.

sufewr 8
Page-23
APPENDIX III

SHIPPING COMPANIES

 

1, Impuications or Soviet ConTROL oF SHIPPING.

From 1939 until 1944 Germany dominated Danube shipping through its control of
shipping companies. The Goering Combine appropriated the Bavarian Lloyd Com-
pany and the two major Austrian companies, and obtained a controlling interest in the
Slovak, Croatian, and Bulgarian companies. Germany thus was able to control the two
Danubian cartels to which all transportation contracts accrued. Consequently, Ru-
manian, Yugoslav, and Hungarian shipping companies were under German domina-
tion despite their apparently independent status. Soviet control over the Danube com-
panies is more stringent and direct than that exercised by the Germans. The USSR
has established “joint companies,” to which the USSR and the respective riparian each
contributes 50% of the assets but which are under Soviet direction. Through these
companies the USSR has also gained contro! of the majority of the ports, port facilities,
and shipbuilding yards in the riparian states.

Of the riparians under Soviet influence, Rumania and Hungary were forced to ac-
cept joint companies and Yugoslavia freely agreed to establish one. Although Czecho-
siovakia has apparently not yet been asked to form a joint company, it will now un-
doubtedly agree if such a request is made. Bulgaria, with its few vessels already under
Communist control, may not be asked to form a joint Soviet company, although the
recent navigation treaty with the USSR may prove to be the basis for such a company.
In addition to these joint shipping companies, the USSR has organized its own shipping
company which operates on the Danube below Vienna. It is subject to no regulations,
not even national customs and border checks.

These agreements creating the joint shipping companies by granting the USSR a
potential monopoly of river navigation, loading and unloading, repair and fueling fa-
cilities throughout the Danube area, will provide the Soviet Union with an effective
weapon to prevent freedom of traffic on the Danube. To date, the Soviets have used
the pretext of military restrictions to keep non-riparian vessels out of the Danube.
However, if at the forthcoming Danube conference the USSR agrees to the principle
of freedom for non-riparian vessels, the monopolistic powers granted the USSR by vir-
tue of the joint companies will, in practice, prevent non-riparians from using the Dan-
ube freely.

These powers include: (a) the absence of any provision in the contracts leasing
the ports to the joint companies that the port facilities be made available to all users;
(b) the capability to charge other users exorbitant rates for use of these facilities; and
(c) the special privileges granted the joint companies, such as freedom from taxes,
preferential treatment in obtaining foreign exchange, right of cabotage, and all the
rights purely national companies are entitled to.
Page-24
snot

The USSR, through the joint companies, has thus obtained the potential monopo-
listic powers over the volume, type, and cost of transport on the Danube formerly
wielded by the major shipping companies which formed cartels dominating transpor-
tation on the river, resulting in discriminatory practices and artificially high rates.
The USSR can thus use these economic controls in addition to its political controls
over the riparian states to obviate any international regulations which may be laid
down concerning freedom of movement.

2. Rumanta-Huncary.

Establishment of the joint Soviet-Rumanian (Sovromtransport) and Soviet-Hun-
garian (Meszhart) Shipping Companies was authorized by the economic collaboration
agreements concluded by the two countries with the USSR. The Rumanian company
was established in July 1945, but anti-Communists delayed establishment of the Hun-
garian company until March 1946. The joint companies were charged with the ad-
ministration and exploitation of river and maritime transport and the management of
ports, port facilities, and shipbuilding enterprises.

Although each “partner” was, in theory, to make equal contributions of vessels,
equipment, installations, supplies, and capital, Rumania and Hungary have actually
made far greater contributions than the USSR. For instance, Rumania was forced
to contribute many vessels for which no credit was given since Rumania was charged
for the cost of repairs which exceeded the base price. In Hungary, one of the Soviet
contributions to MESZHART was the Pecs coal mines, which the USSR arbitrarily valued
at 25 million dollars. In 1936 the mines were valued at 6 million dollars. Moreover,
Rumania and Hungary were forced to lease ports, shipyards, and vessels to the joint
companies at only nominal rates. The two countries were also to participate equally in
the management of the companies. Actually the general manager is a Soviet in each
company and consequently the USSR has the power to administer the entire activities,
property, and funds of the companies.

Originally SOVROMTRANSPORT owned 185 vessels, of which 101 were contributed
by the Rumanians and 84 by the Soviets. By July 1946 SOVROMTRANSPORT vessels
had increased to 221 as a result of the addition of 23 craft returned to Rumania by the
USSR, on condition that they be contributed to SOVROMTRANSPORT, and of 13 ves-
sels belonging to the Rumanian Danube Navigation Company (SRD) which was ab-
sorbed by SOVROMTRANSPORT. Moreover, 250 vessels were requisitioned by the Ru-
manian government and leased to SOVROMTRANSPORT to help carry out armistice
deliveries. The Rumanian government is exerting such economic pressure on the
privately owned vessels operating independently of SOVROMTRANSPORT that they are
slowly being driven out of business. For example, in the summer of 1947 the Ministry
of Communications ordered government and government-controlled agencies to use
SOVROMTRANSPORT facilities when shipping via the Danube, and in January 1948
SOVROMTRANSPORT was given a monopoly over the commercial transport of pas-
sengers and cargo over specified routes. Moreover, SOVROMTRANSPORT was given
the right to lease port facilities and shipyards at Constantza, Galatz, Braila, and Giurgiu
with preference for leasing the rest of the ports in Rumania.

safe 10
Page-25
of

Soviet contributions to the joint Soviet-Hungarian Shipping Company (MESZ-
HART) included the assets in Hungary of the First Danube Steamship Company
(DDSG) of Austria which the USSR claimed as German reparations and which com-
prised the Pecs coal mines and several apartment houses and factories. The USSR also
contributed 28 vessels seized as war booty in Hungary and Rumania. Hungary gave all
the assets of the Royal Hungarian River and Sea Shipping Company (MFTR) compris-
ing the 16 vessels then in Hungary and all Hungarian ports except Budapest, Gyor, Baja,
Mohacs, and Szeged, which are leased to the company. Hungary was also supposed to
contribute the 200 MFTR vessels which were at that time in the US zone of Austria.
When these vessels were returned, however, they apparently remained under the control
of MFTR and its subsidiary, the Danube Ocean Shipping Company (DTRT). This is
probably only a temporary arrangement which will end whenever the Soviets request
implementation of the earlier agreement.

Meanwhile, the three operating Hungarian shipping companies are: (a) MESZ-
HART, with 10 tugs and freighters and 46 barges and tankers; (b) MFTR, with 25 tugs
and freighters and 114 barges and tankers; (c) DTRT, with 4 sea-going vessels currently
scheduled to operate to Near Eastern ports. Despite the relative smallness of MESZ-
HART, Soviet control over Hungary’s Danube shipping is assured through MESZHART’s
control over the major ports, and facilities and the preferential treatment accorded
MESZHART by the Hungarian government.

Neither SOVROMTRANSPORT nor MESZHART can be liquidated except by joint
agreement of the two countries involved.

3. Yuaosavia.

Unlike the Rumanian and Hungarian joint companies, the Yugoslav-Soviet Joint
Shipping Company (JUSPAD), formed in March 1947, is the result of an agreement
between two ostensibly independent countries, but it is very similar to the other ship-
ping companies. Like MESZHART and SOVROMTRANSPORT, JUSPAD was formed
“to exploit river navigation on the Danube and its tributaries; to utilize ports, quays,
facilities, and equipment; to organize river and marine transport, construct; expand,
and exploit shipbuilding yards; and to transact transport and commercial business”.
The capital is divided equally between the two countries, but instead of contributing
vessels, each country has contributed an equal amount of capital (4 million dollars).
Shares of the company cannot be sold without permission of both parties. The Board
of Directors is equally divided between representatives of both countries. The Soviets
control JUSPAD through the sweeping powers given the Director General (a Soviet
citizen) just as they control MESZHART and SOVROMTRANSPORT through the So-
viet general manager of these companies.

Whereas the joint companies in Rumania and Hungary handle internal as well as
international shipping, JUSPAD is limited to handling Yugoslav shipping to other
countries, while all traffic within Yugoslavia is controlled by the State River Navigation

“Yugoslav Commercial Register No. 38 for the Yugoslav-Soviet Danube Navigation Company of

Belgrade, 1 March 1947.
iL suffer
Page-26
suo

Company (DRB), which leases 151 of its 471 vessels to JUSPAD for 400 dinars (8 dol-
lars) adayeach. In return, the USSR has agreed to build the largest drydock in Yugo-
slavia at Ada Chuaj. The USSR has clearly demanded much less of Yugoslavia than
it has of Hungary and Rumania, although it has sufficient interest in Yugoslav shipping
to assure continued control of international Danube traffic through Yugoslav waters.

4. USSR.

Immediately after the war ended, the USSR established the Soviet Danube State
Shipping Company (SDGP) whose fleet consisted of captured Austrian, Hungarian, and
German vessels, and of vessels delivered under the terms of the Rumanian armistice,
and a few Czechoslovak and Dutch craft. Headquarters for this company are in Ismail
and Reni, newly acquired Soviet ports in Bessarabia. SDGP reportedly had 289 ves-
sels in the spring of 1947. SDGP is the Soviet agency which participates in the joint
companies with Hungary, Yugoslavia, and Rumania.

The SDGP primarily carries cargoes for the Soviet government and its military
authorities, but also offers commercial freight service. Although SDGP, operating
under state subsidy, could afford to make its tariff rates so low as to preclude competi-
tion by other Danube shipping firms, there is no evidence that the Soviet state com-
pany engages in unfair competitive practices or enters into any exclusive operating
agreements with other firms. The fact that SDGP vessels do not respect frontier or
customs regulations in traveling along the Danube indicates that the USSR has no in-
tention of according even formal recognition to the sovereignty of the Satellites in this
matter.

5. AUSTRIA.

The USSR has thus far been unable to obtain complete control of the two Austrian
shipping companies—First Danube Shipping Company (DDSG) and Continental Steam-
ship Company (COMOS). Prior to the war Austrian vessels constituted the third larg-
est fleet operating on the Danube, and contributed substantially to the economy of
Austria and the Danube basin as a whole. The presence in the US Zone of Austria of
nearly 50% of the vessels belonging to these companies has blocked Soviet attempts to
absorb the companies. Moreover, as long as these vessels remain under Western con-
trol, they constitute a threat to complete Soviet domination of the Danube.

Final disposition of these companies and their vessels must await conclusion of
the Austrian treaty. The USSR maintains that it is entitled to DDSG assets under the
Potsdam Agreement as a result of the purchase in 1939 by the Goering Combine of the
46% interest in DDSG owned by the Italians. Originally the USSR had demanded all
DDSG assets in the Soviet-controlled Satellites as well as 25% of those in Austria. Re-
cently, however, Soviet peace treaty negotiators have shown a disposition to compromise
on their original demands as to the percentage of DDSG shares they will insist on.

Pending a solution of this problem, operations by the Austrian companies are at a
virtual standstill. In the US zone, some ships are operating passenger routes between
Linz and Engelhartszell and 100,000 tons of Ruhr coal a month are being moved on DDSG

sofier 12
Page-27
super
vessels from Regensburg to Linz. Although accurate figures are unavailable, the over-
whelming majority of the DDSG vessels in the US zone (approximately. 250) are in-
operative. Disposition of the company’s estimated 300 vessels in the Soviet zone is
unknown. Some have unquestionably been seized as war booty by the Soviets; others
have been transferred to Soviet-dominated companies. Regardless of their present
status, it is unlikely that after the peace treaty is concluded the USSR will agree to re-
turn many of these vessels to DDSG. This loss of vessels, coupled with Soviet seizure of
DDSG assets (including dock, cranes, port facilities, etc.) in the Soviet zone of Austria,
Hungary, and Rumania, will seriously reduce the importance of DDSG if freedom of
navigation on the Danube is ever again resumed.

Meanwhile, the USSR can be expected to continue its attempts to gain control of
DDSG and COMOS. Principal levers the Soviets may use in this campaign include:
(a) a promise that if Austria will agree to establish a joint Soviet-Austrian company,
the USSR will return to the joint company all vessels and facilities seized as German
assets; and (b) threats that only by allowing Soviet participation in DDSG will Austria
have access to the Soviet-controlled Danube.

Thus, continued Austrian refusal of Soviet demands will seriously weaken the fi-
nancial position of the Austrian companies and may result in their exclusion from the
Soviet-controlled Danube. On the other hand, capitulation to the Soviet demands
would extend Soviet control of the Danube to Germany and increase the USSR’s poten-
tial for additional penetration of the Austrian economy.

6. CZECHOSLOVAKIA.

In the spring of 1946, the Czechoslovakian Danube Navigation Company (CSDP),
consisting of 59 vessels, was nationalized and put under the management of the Navi-
gation Section of the Ministry of Transport. Approximately 125 vessels have since
been restituted to Czechoslovakia by the US and the USSR.'_ So far, the USSR has not.
demanded that the Czechoslovaks form a joint Soviet company. However, the USSR
may take advantage of its recently strengthened position in Czechoslovakia to do so in
order to gain control of the large modern Skoda shipyard at Komarno; the important
port of Bratislava; and the Czechoslovak fleet which the Czechs plan to increase to
twice its prewar size.

7, BUuLcaria.

The Bulgarian River Navigation Company (BRP) is state-owned and operated by
the Division of Water Communications of the Ministry of Railroad, Automobile and
Water Communications. Most of the BRP fleet was destroyed during the war. In
February 1946, the BRP had approximately 25 vessels in operation. Not more than
10 privately owned vessels operate in Bulgaria. So far the Soviets have not formed a
joint company with Bulgaria, probably because the Bulgarian fleet is so insignificant.
However, the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation, which was signed by Bulgaria and

13 soles

"See Appendix VIII.
Page-28
a a

the USSR in April 1948, provides for increased economic collaboration between the two
countries and may result in the formation of a joint company.

8. Non-RipaRiaN COUNTRIES.

The French Navigation Company (SFND) which had headquarters at Braila, Ru-
mania, before the war, owned 26 vessels in 1943. SFND now has 16 vessels on the Dan-
ube ready to start operation as soon as circumstances permit. Three vessels are still
in Soviet hands, two are in the US zone of Austria, and two are being repaired by the
Rumanians. In May 1947 the USSR attempted to charter or purchase the SFND fleet
but the French refused.

Little is known concerning the disposition of the British, Dutch, and Greek prewar
fleets. Many were seized by Germany and the USSR, many were destroyed and some
have been taken from the Danube for use elsewhere by the parent companies. The
USSR returned 14 vessels to the British, most of which are now being repaired by Ru-
mania according to the provisions of the Armistice agreement. A tentative contract
was made by a private Rumanian company for the charter of three of the barges al-
ready repaired but governmental pressure prevented the charterers from implementing
the contract. A British tug has been under charter to the Rumanian government since
June 1947 and is permitted to fly the British flag. A few Greek vessels are idle in Ru-
manian waters; others have been chartered to SOVROMTRANSPORT; and some have
been purchased (but not paid for as yet) by Rumania for delivery as reparations to the
USSR. Little is known of the disposition of the Dutch fleet which comprised 55 vessels
before the war. The Sindey-Italian Danube Navigation Company is under liquidation
because all its vessels were scuttled or seized.

oF 14
Page-29
APPENDIX IV
SHIPPING ACTIVITIES

Incomplete reports on postwar shipping on the Danube indicate a slow increase
in traffic since the end of the war. The return of vessels by the Soviet Union and the
United States, the repair of port facilities, the re-establishment of shipping companies,
and the resumption of trade contributed to increased traffic among the Satellite ri-
parians. On the other hand, there has been practically no activity on the Danube be-
tween the US zones of Germany and Austria and the Soviet zone of Austria. The USSR
has consistently prevented passage of vessels from the US zones to the lower Danube
and consequently the US has been forced to retaliate by preventing the entry into its
zone of Soviet or Satellite vessels. The Soviets have also excluded practically all non-
riparian vessels from the Danube.

Although numerous obstacles prevent a rapid restoration of Danube traffic to pre-
war levels, the Danube, under Soviet domination, may become an even more important
artery of commerce than it was in prewar days. Soviet emphasis on vastly increased
trade between the Satellites will result in an increase in Danube traffic. In prewar
days, much of Hungary’s exports to the West went by rail via Trieste; much of Ru-
mania’s grain and oil was shipped to Western markets via the Maritime Danube only,
while Yugoslav exports to the West also were shipped via Adriatic ports or by rail.
Postwar curtailment of these Western exports and their gradual diversion to other
Satellites or the USSR may substantially increase the percentage of Satellite traffic
carried on the Danube. Such an increase would in part compensate for the decrease
in Danube traffic which would result if the Austrian and German portions remain
separated from the Soviet-dominated Danube and if East-West trade is not resumed.

The rate at which this trend toward increased Danube traffic materializes will de-
pend upon the ability of the USSR and its Satellites to: (a) restore the physical con-
dition of the Danube (see Appendix II); (b) restore the Danube fleets and port facili-
ties (see Appendices III and V); and (c) restore the general economic level of the
Satellites.

a. Czechoslovakia.

In 1947 Czechoslovak traffic had reached roughly 50% of the 1936 level. The
Czechoslovak government hopes to quadruple the 1947 traffic and to take over the major
part of the shipping previously handled by Austria. Czech river ports were visited by
Yugoslav, Bulgarian, Rumanian, and Soviet vessels in 1947.

b. Hungary.

During the last four months of 1946, over 2,000 vessels traveled through the
Hungarian Danube. About 35% of these were flying the Soviet flag, while 25% and
30% flew the Yugoslav and Czechoslovak flags, respectively. Only 10% of the vessels

15 sgfler
Page-30
suff

were Hungarian, Bulgarian, and Rumanian, whereas before the war 60% of the vessels
were of these nationalities. Movement of vessels on the Danube in Hungary from
January to September 1947 totaled 3,480, ‘an increase of 1,787 over the corresponding
period in 1946.

An indication of the amount of traffic at Budapest is the loadings and unload-
ings at the Free Port of Csepel. During 1946, loadings in the commercial basin dropped
51.4% and unloadings 45.4% as compared to 1938. On the other hand, traffic in the
oil basin increased 29.5% in unloadings and 13.4% in loadings compared to 1938 figures.
The decrease in commercial basin activity was due primarily to the lack of vessels
(many of which were still in the US zones of Germany and Austria) and the extremely
bad harvest. In addition to shipments to riparian countries, three Hungarian sea-
going vessels carried 16,803 metric tons of cargo to the Near East during the first six
months of 1947.

c. Bulgaria.

Vessels from the USSR, Rumania, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary serviced Bul-
garian ports. The insignificance of the Danube to Bulgaria’s economy, however, is
illustrated by the fact that in 1947 from 22 May through 31 October activity at the
Bulgarian ports of Ruse, Lom, Somovit, and Svishtov consisted only of: (1) five Soviet
vessels bringing iron and steel products, rubber goods, and raw materials; (2) nine
Czechoslovakian vessels carrying agricultural implements, machinery and equipment,
chemicals, and consumers’ goods; (3) four Hungarian vessels loaded with electric ma-
chinery and railroad rails; (4) one Rumanian vessel carrying pitch; and (5) four Bul-
garian vessels bringing goods from Czechoslovakia and Rumania.

d. Rumania.

SOVROMTRANSPORT has established regular passenger service to most Dan-
ube ports, including such long distance lines as that between Galatz and Vienna with
stops at Giurgiu, Turnu Severin, Belgrade, Budapest, and Bratislava. The round trip
takes 15 days and three trips monthly are scheduled.

Official Rumanian figures indicate that SOVROMTRANSPORT transported
upstream during April and May 1947 nearly as many metric tons of cargo as it had dur-
ing the whole of 1946 (58,000 metric tons as compared to 63,652 metric tons for 1946).

e. USSR.

Reni, which the USSR acquired with Bessarabia, is replacing Galatz and Braila
as the most important Danube maritime port. Goods are brought downstream from
the riparian countries by Czech, Rumanian, and Yugoslav vessels and transferred at
Reni to Soviet vessels for shipment to the USSR. Most of these goods are reparations.
Likewise, Soviet ships transfer iron ore and pyrites at Reni to Yugoslav, Czechoslovakian,
and Rumanian vessels for shipment up the Danube. Since Reni is also the terminus
of.an oil pipeline from Ploesti, Soviet tankers sail from here with oil for the Soviet
Union.

oofler 16
Page-31
fe

An analysis of traffic passing through the port of Sulina shows that the percentage
of Soviet vessels entering or leaving the Danube decreased from 92% of the total in
1946 to 86% for the period covered in 1947. During 1946 only five Satellite vessels
passed out through the Sulina channel while 11 came in. During an 18-week period
in 1947, however, seven Satellite vessels left the Danube and 11 returned. Moreover,
the percentage of Soviet vessels entering the Danube with cargo increased from ap-
proximately 14% of the total number of incoming Soviet vessels in 1946 to 100% dur-
ing an 18-week period in 1947, for which figures are available. During these same pe-
riods, no non-riparian vessels entered or exited the Sulina channel.

2. ‘TRAFFIC ON THE MarITIME DaNuBE.

17 s ET
Page-32
sugfler

APPENDIX V
PORTS

Although the principal Danubian ports were badly damaged during the war, most
of them have been repaired and could now operate at nearly prewar capacity. Re-
building and enlarging of port and shipyard facilities are part of the postwar recon-
struction activities of the Danubian countries.

The USSR has obtained effective control over all the Danube’s major port facilities
except those in the US zones of Germany and Austria. The USSR exercises indirect
control over the ports in Vienna, the Czechoslovak ports, some minor ports in Rumania
(which may, however, be taken over by SOVROMTRANSPORT at any time) and the
Bulgarian ports (which are controlled by the Bulgarian government). The USSR exer-
cises direct control over all other ports, which are administered either by Soviet mili-
tary authorities or by joint shipping companies.

1. CzecHostovakia.

After completion of the Danube-Oder canal, (which will require at least six years)
Bratislava is expected to become one of the most important Danubian ports. Damage
done during the war has been repaired and the Two-Year Economic Plan calls for a 100
percent expansion of its facilities. There are now 19 warehouses with a capacity of
322,916 sq. feet; 16 cranes, one grain exhauster, 27 oil tanks with a capacity of 370,807
cubic feet each and one of 141,260 cubic feet, four pontoon fueling stations, two per-
manent fueling stations, and 21.75 miles of railroad tracks. Bratislava’s winter port
has two basins covering 269,097 sq. feet.

In expectation of greatly increased shipping after the completion of the Danube-
Oder canal, the Czechoslovak government also plans to improve and expand the port
of Komarno. This port suffered little war damage and, although smaller than Bratis-
lava, is more modern. There are four warehouses with storage capacity of 71,580 sq.
feet, five cranes and 15.5 miles of tracks. Since the war, Komarno has handled a great
deal of traffic between Czechoslovakia and the Balkans. The nationalized Skoda
shipyard is also located at Komarno. Under the Two-Year Plan, 150 million kes (3
million dollars) has been allocated to double the capacity of this shipyard by the end
of 1948.

2. Hunaary.

The port at Budapest (Csepel) is the most important of the 13 Hungarian ports;
before the war it handled 12 percent of the entire Danubian traffic, more than any
other Danube port. Repair of the badly damaged port was begun right after the siege
and within a few weeks it was in use again. However, extensive repairs will be required
before the port attains its prewar capacity. In 1946 all the facilities of this port were

a 18
Page-33
sug fr
leased to MESZHART (joint Soviet-Hungarian company) for 30 years. Gyor, Baja,

Mohacs, and Szeged were also leased to MESZHART. All other former MFTR port
facilities in Hungary were ceded outright to MESZHART.

The contract leasing the Port of Budapest to MESZHART reveals the extent to
which the USSR has used the joint shipping company technique to dominate Satellite
Danubian traffic. The terms of the contract make it possible for the USSR to: (a)
obtain the maximum “profit” from all Hungarian shipping; (b) exercise considerable
control over Hungary’s economy; and (c) carry out monopolistic practices designed to
deny Hungarian waters and facilities to any company or nation not acceptable to the
USSR. MESZHART has been granted a 30-year lease on all harbor equipment (except
repair shops), including docks; landing stations; factory, dwelling, auxiliary and other
buildings; warehouses and elevators; mechanical transshipment facilities; mechanical
installations in the oil, commercial, free, and industrial basins; railways and other
communication lines in the port’s territories. The company and the USSR have also
obtained preferential rights in the matter of the rent to be paid to the Hungarian
government. The company will determine the administrative expenses charged to
the operation of the rented facilities. This amount will be deducted from the gross
income derived from the facilities and the rent will be 65 percent of the difference.
Of the remaining 35 percent, the Soviet and Hungarian partners of MESZHART will
obtain an equal share. Although the Hungarian government has the theoretical right
to check the accounts of the company, the USSR can in practice avoid paying any rent
by arbitrarily inflating the amount of the expenses. Moreover, the Hungarian govern-
ment is responsible for the upkeep of the harbor installations at its own expense.
MESZHART is permitted to sublease any harbor equipment listed in the contract. This
provision, in addition to permitting the Soviets to obtain even more direct control of
the port, could also result in greater financial benefits to the company and the USSR.
MESZHART is guaranteed all the rights which the port’s former management. had
(such as issuing of warehouse warrants and duty-free handling of goods in the free
port), but is not compelled to adhere to those former regulations which provided for
equal treatment of all vessels regardless of flag or origin.

3. Yucosnavia.

Although nominally the Yugoslav State River Navigation Company (DRB) con-
trols all ports in Yugoslavia — including the major ones at Belgrade (Cukarica),
Pancevo, Novi Sad, Smederevo, and Apatin— the USSR virtually controls Pancevo
and Prahovo which are used primarily for Yugoslavia’s trade with the Soviet Union.
Supplies and war materials destined for western Yugoslavia are unloaded at Pancevo
(across the river from Belgrade), while shipments for southern Yugoslavia, Albania,
and the Greek guerrillas pass through Prahovo near the Yugoslav-Bulgarian border.
Before the war Prahovo was a relatively insignificant port. Under Soviet pressure,
however, the Yugoslavs are attempting to expand its facilities, although lack of modern
equipment has thus far prevented new construction and the adjoining port of Kusjak
has been pressed into service. Considerable improvements in the port will be necessary

19 suffer
Page-34
Tf

to prevent a recurrence of the 1947 traffic tie-up which resulted from the inability to
operate the port during the period of low water level. Soviet use of the undeveloped
ports of Pancevo and Prahovo instead of such better equipped ports as Belgrade and
Novi Sad was probably intended to: (a) facilitate the movement of military supplies
with the maximum secrecy; and (b) concentrate Soviet shipping in as few ports as
possible.

4. Burcaria.

Bulgarian ports handled only 1.5 percent of all prewar Danubian traffic. Although
Bulgaria’s Two-Year plan calls for improvements of the major ports of Ruse and Lom,
Danube traffic is unlikely to play an important part in Bulgaria's economy, because
the Balkan mountain range cuts off so much of the country from the river. More-
over, lack of capital and equipment will retard the planned harbor improvements.

The Bulgarian government assumed complete control of all Danube ports on 23
September 1947. The Directorate of Water Communications is authorized to organize,
administer, manage, and control all activities at all Bulgarian ports and all other
public or private institutions were forbidden to engage in such activities.

5. RUMANIA.

The most important Rumanian ports on the maritime Danube are Galatz, Braila,
and Sulina. Galatz and Braila are important transfer points for cargo entering the
Danube destined for fluvial ports. Braila and Galatz are Rumania’s principal grain
terminals on the Danube, while Galatz is also a timber terminal. Sulina has no
inland rail and poor road connections and is important primarily as headquarters for
the administration of the Danube mouth. All three ports were badly damaged during
the war. By August 1947 Galatz was 70 percent reconstructed. The shipyard is in
operation and there are plans for converting former naval enterprises into a new ship-
yard for building tugs, etc. Plans to rebuild Braila in 1948 include repairing war dam-
age, extending the port’s rail network, building landing pontoons, and connecting the
grain elevators directly to the port. Little reconstruction has taken place so far at
Sulina. The Soviet Army was reported still in charge at Braila, Galatz, and Sulina
in the fall of 1947.

On the fluvial Danube Giurgiu, Turnu Severin, Moldova, Orsova, and Oltenita are
the most important ports. Giurgiu was formerly used extensively for the shipment
of oil, grain, and timber up the Danube. Wartime destruction of nearly 80 percent
of its oil storage capacity and the preponderance of oil shipments to the USSR have
limited present port activity. Moldova and Orsova were enlarged during the war,
while war damage to Turnu Severin had been repaired by 1946.

The agreement creating SOVROMTRANSPORT provides a 30-year lease of most
of the quays’ warehouses and other port facilities at the three leading Rumanian
ports — Giurgiu, Galatz, and Braila. The company has also leased virtually all Ru-
mania’s shipbuilding and repair yards. In addition, the company has preferential
rights to lease the remaining port facilities on the Danube. By denying privately

soffier 20
Page-35
suffer
owned or non-riparian ships access to the repair facilities in these shipyards, SOV-
ROMTRANSPORT can effectively control all shipping activity on the lower Danube.

6. USSR.

Soviet acquisition of the former Rumanian ports of Renj and Ismail has contributed
to the USSR’s potential for domination of the Danube. Both ports are being repaired
to prewar capacity and are important export centers for Bessarabian wheat. Reni
is also the terminus of an oil pipe line from Ploesti. The increasing dependence of
Rumania and the other Danube states on imports from the USSR has increased the
significance of Soviet control over Reni. The USSR can direct incoming Soviet ocean
vessels to transship at Reni, thus diverting traffic from Rumania’s maritime ports and
permitting the USSR to give preferential treatment to its own Danubian vessels.

7. AUSTRIA.

Linz is the only major Austrian port which is not in the Soviet zone. DDSG owns
the port facilities at Linz which is now the US zone headquarters for the company.
As the southernmost port on that part of the Danube which can be used by German
and Austrian vessels, it is important as the unloading point for Ruhr coal.

Soviet control over a considerable portion of the Danube in Austria has deprived
United States authorities of a convenient transportation route for supplying United
States troops and the indigenous population in Vienna. At the present time, supplies
for Vienna shipped via the Danube from Germany are unloaded at Linz and reloaded
on rail cars and motor trucks.

The USSR has taken over all DDSG port facilities in its zone; those which the USSR
cannot claim as DDSG property, such as the Kuchelau dockyard in Vienna, the Soviet
Army has appropriated for its use. Korneuburg, just north of Vienna, is the prin-
cipal port used by the Soviets. Located near the important Zistersdorf oil fields, it
serves as the outlet for oil shipped to the USSR via the Danube. The Viennese ports
of Winterhafen, Fischamend, Brucke der Roten Armee (Reichsbrucke), Zwischen-
brucken, and Donaukaibahnhof, now under Soviet control, were badly damaged during
the war and have not yet been fully repaired.

The only undamaged port in the Soviet zone which is not under Soviet control is
Albern, 8 miles from Vienna. A plan for the development of Albern as a free port was
presented to the Economic Cabinet Committee in December 1947 as a means to regain
Vienna's prewar position as a major port (second only to Budapest in amount of traffic
handled). As one step in developing Albern as a competitor with Bratislava for traffic
from the Danube-Oder Canal, the Austrians have already constructed one quarter of a
canal between Albern and Angern on the Danube-Oder Canal 10 miles upstream from
Bratislava. This canal would facilitate the shipment of goods directly to Vienna rather
than to Bratislava.

Albern is connected with Vienna 7% miles away by a good road and a railroad.
The port is deep and will accommodate at least 16 average size barges. Austrian offi-
cials state that the port is ready for immediate use, although necessary warehouses

21 ofr
Page-36
: suffer

and a wall enclosing the free port area would have to be built. Port facilities include
four modern storage elevators (the Soviets claim one as an external German asset).
The planning group also wants to include in the free port area the winter harbor a
few miles upstream and the port of Lobau directly across the river, both of which are
larger than Albern. The winter harbor which could accommodate 51 barges and
Lobau which had excellent oil facilities were both badly damaged during the war
and have not yet been reconstructed. The Austrians hope to have branch offices, ware-
houses and assembly plants of foreign firms in the free area.

Plans for developing Bratislava as the crossroads between the Baltic and the
Adriatic and Black Seas are causing Austrians concern for Vienna's prewar position
as the central point for commerce between Central Europe and the Balkans. Not only
the Danube-Oder Canal but also the proposed highway, rail lines, and even a canal from
Bratislava to Trieste across the Hungarian plain are aimed at keeping all communica-
tions east of Austria.

soofer 22
Page-37
fo

APPENDIX VI

DANUBE BRIDGES

1. Sovier Ams.

The expansion of Soviet interest in Eastern Europe has increased the military and
strategic importance of rail and road bridges across the Danube. Prior to the war,
the major land routes crossing the Danube were at Bratislava, Budapest, Novi Sad, and
Belgrade. Reconstruction of these bridges (destroyed by the retreating German army)
has thus been a cardinal factor in the USSR’s postwar plans for the military consolida-
tion of Eastern Europe. Soviet troops and engineers consequently assisted in the re-
construction of these bridges. The USSR was also instrumental in formulating plans
for the construction of a new rail bridge connecting Rumania with Bulgaria at Corabia.
The location of this bridge suggests that it was chosen primarily for strategic rather
than economic considerations. Moreover, the importance of these bridges to the USSR’s
strategic and military interests in Eastern and Southern Europe provides the Krem-
lin with an additional incentive to maintain control over the Danube and to exclude
all non-riparian vessels.

2. GERMANY-AUSTRIA.

The principal bridges across the Danube in Germany and Austria, including the
important Krautelstein bridge at Passau and the Tulln railway bridge at Vienna, were
destroyed during the war. Most of these have since been rebuilt or repaired.

3. CZECHOSLOVAKIA.

Reconstruction of the Bratislava bridge was completed by Red Army engineers and
Czechoslovak workers in February 1946.

4. Huncary.

Restoration of the Danube bridges in Hungary has been under way since 1945, but
the large number of bridges destroyed has made Hungary’s task far more difficult
than that of the other Satellites. Of the four prewar railroad bridges in Hungary,
only one — the South Railway Bridge in Budapest — has been reconstructed and that
only provisionally. Wreckage has been removed from the sites of the rail bridges at
Ujpest and Baja and their reconstruction has been started under the Hungarian Three-
Year plan, which also calls for the construction of a permanent steel railroad bridge to
replace the provisional South Railway Bridge in Budapest. The rail bridge linking
the Hungarian port of Komarom with Komarno in Czechoslovakia is also being re-
constructed.

Some progress has also been made to rebuild or replace Budapest’s destroyed road
bridges. By early 1948 work was completed on one permanent road bridge (Szabadsag

23 sift:
Page-38
; SEgher

Hid) and on one semi-permanent bridge (Kossuth Hid); a permanent bridge (Margit
Hid) was completed to an island in the center of the river with the remainder scheduled
for completion by August 1948; the chain bridge is being rebuilt; and work is pro-
gressing on the Arpad bridge which had been started before the war. The Arpad bridge
will be 3,000 feet long and 90 feet wide and is designed to permit through Vienna-Bel-
grade-Bucharest traffic to by-pass city traffic in Budapest. It will thus facilitate the
movement of military ground forces across Hungary.

5. YUGOSLAVIA.

Primarily for strategic reasons, the USSR has contributed substantially toward
the reconstruction of Yugoslav railway and vehicle bridges. Soviet army engineers
completed construction by August 1947 of permanent bridges at Belgrade and at
Erdut. The Belgrade span, which is 4,000 feet in length, was named “The Bridge of
the Red Army” and was highly publicized as an example of the close liaison between
Moscow and Belgrade. It forms a significant commercial and military link between
Yugoslavia and Soviet forces in Austria, Hungary, and the USSR. The Erdut bridge
reduces by 100 miles the overland distance between the northeastern province of
Vojvadina and the provinces to the south. ‘A new rail and vehicular bridge at Novi
Sad was completed in 1945.

6. RuMANIA-Butcaria.

Rumania’s only Danube bridge at Cernavoda providing rail connections between
Bucharest and Constantza was not damaged during the war. Prior to the war, the
majority of communications between Rumania and Bulgaria was by coastal vessels
or on Danube ferries carrying railroad cars and other vehicles. Since the war the
USSR has set up pontoon bridges at various points in the lower Danube for use when
needed by Red Army troops or local traffic.

Plans have now been completed, however, at the direct instigation of the USSR
for the construction of a new rail bridge to run from Corabia in Rumania to Gigen
in Bulgaria. Although prewar plans called for a bridge between Giurgiu and Ruse
(which would have been of more immediate economic benefit to the two countries),
the USSR apparently insisted upon the Corabia-Gigen site as an integral part of the
over-all Soviet plan for integration of the Soviet-Satellite rail systems. The new bridge,
which will be constructed with the help of the USSR, Poland, and Yugoslavia as well
as Rumania and Bulgaria, will provide a more direct highway and rail connection be-
tween the Baltic states and the Near East. Three rail routes lead into the line termi-
nating at Corabia: (a) the line from Czechoslovakia and Poland through the Oltul
Valley; (b) the line connecting with the new Craiova-Bucharest line and thence to the
USSR; and (c) the main line from Hungary and Central Europe. On the Bulgarian
side, the new bridge connects with a railroad under construction from Gigen to Pleven
where connections can be made to: (a) Sofia, Skoplje, and Salonika; and (b) Lovech,
Trogan (through a long tunnel to be cut in the Stara Planina mountains), Karlovo,
Plovdiv, and on to Istanbul and Alexandroupolis.

7 a 24
Page-39
suffer

In February 1948, the Soviets completed construction of a bridge at Reni over
the River Prut (where it meets the Danube). This bridge connects Galatz and the
Ploesti oil fields with South Bessarabia and the rest of the USSR. The cost of this
all-steel bridge, which is 422 feet long and 52 fect high, was borne jointly by the Soviets
and Rumanians. It was opened in February 1948.

7. USSR.

25 a
Page-40
APPENDIX VII
CANALS

The importance of the Danube as a channel of communication in Eastern and
Central Europe is greatly enhanced by the canal systems which are planned eventually
to connect the Danube with the Atlantic Ocean and the Baltic Sea.

1. Danupe-MaIn-RHINE CANAL.

The first concrete efforts to link the Rhine system with the Danube began in the
middle of the 19th century when the 277-mile Ludwig Canal (Main-Danube) was built.
The Ludwig Canal was reopened in June 1947 but navigation in some sections was
limited to vessels of 120 tons. After the first World War, plans were drawn up for
the construction of a Rhine-Main-Danube Canal which would accommodate vessels
up to 1,500 tons. This canal, with terminal points at Mainz and Kelheim, would make
use of part of the old Ludwig Canal. If completed, this canal would facilitate East-
West trade and provide a direct line of inland communication from the Atlantic Ocean
to the Black Sea.

2. DanupBe-ObeR CANAL.

Planning has been underway since 1901 on projects to connect the Elbe, Oder, and
Danube Rivers. Present plans, however, are limited to a Danube-Oder Canal in line with
the Soviet policy of reducing Eastern Europe’s dependence on Western Europe. Plans
for the canal were first announced in May 1947 at the signing of the Czech-Polish Treaty
of Friendship and Mutual Assistance. Construction of the canal was further provided
for in the Polish-Czech Trade Agreement of July 1947 and in the Czechoslovak Two-
Year Plan. Plans call for dredging the Oder River from Kozle in Poland to Moravska
Ostrava in Czechoslovakia. From shortly beyond Moravska Ostrava, a canal will be
built to the Morava River, which will be made navigable to its confluence with the
Danube just above Bratislava. The system will be 200 miles long and accommodate
vessels up to 1,000 tons. (Austria has agreed to give Czechoslovakia a 984-foot strip
on the west bank of the Morava River from its confluence with the Danube to the point
where it enters Czechoslovakia so that the Czechoslovak government can better ad-
minister the canal.) The canal will take six years to build and will cost an estimated
$650,000,000. Poland and Czechoslovakia will bear the greater part of the expense but
Austria, Hungary, Rumania, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria will a!so be asked to contribute.
When completed, this waterway will connect the Baltic with the Black Sea. It will
also link industrial Poland and Czechoslovakia with the predominantly agricultural
Balkan countries. The canal will assume even greater importance if trade between
Western and Eastern Europe is cut off.

3. Danupe-Tisa-DANUBE CANAL.

The Yugoslav Danube south of the Hungarian border winds irregularly between
marshy banks. It is too shallow in places for normal traffic and it often floods ex-

softer 26
Page-41
sufizr
tensive nearby areas. Consequently, Yugoslavia decided to build a canal from the
Danube at Bezdan to the Tisa at Stary Becej and back to the Danube at Banatska
Palanka. Construction of this 150-mile canal began in August 1947. It will be
197 feet wide and 20 feet deep. It will shorten Danube navigation by 55 miles.

The canal project will also include: (a) a whole network of lateral canals linking
important towns; (b) irrigation canals serving agricultural areas; (c) construction
of a dam at Stary Becej to regulate the course of the Tisa and provide hydroelectric
power; and (d) the development of lakes from the marshland which will be stocked
with fresh water fish. The two existing canals in this area will be incorporated into
this system. They are the Kral Peter Canal (which is inadequate for modern re-
quirements and must be improved) connecting the Danube at Batina (Bezdan) and
the Tisa at Stary Becej; and the Kralje Alexsandre Canal which connects Mali Stapar
on the Kral Peter Canal with Novi Sad on the Danube.

4. Danupe-Sava Cana Prosecr.

In Yugoslavia a plan for the construction of a canal from Vukovar on the Danube
to Samac on the Sava is being studied. This canal would shorten the water route
between Vukovar and Samac from 300 to 37 miles. A supplementary plan calls for
the canalization of the River Bosnia to Doboj (an important future industrial center)
thus connecting Bosnia with Central Europe. Movable gates would be built at Samac
(a little below the mouth of the River Bosnia) which would: (a) supply the canal with
sufficient water for navigation; (b) utilize the water power of the Sava; (c) increase
the depth of the Sava upstream from Samac; (d) make navigation possible on the
River Bosnia for 10 miles to where canalization would start; (e) supply the network
of irrigation canals at Posavlja with water; (f) lessen flood danger on the lower Sava;
and (g) create a reservoir of water in the valley of the Sava which could be used for
electric power or irrigation.

5. Sto Cana.

The Sio Canal connecting Lake Balaton and the Danube in Hungary was opened
in September 1947. It is important as a link between the bauxite-producing region
of Hungary and the USSR, principal recipient of this product.

6. MiscELLANEOUS PROJECTS.

Minor canals proposed or under construction are: (a) the Bratislava-Komarno
canal on which preparatory research work has been renewed; (b) the Cernavoda-Con-
stantza canal which is under consideration; (c) the Danube-Tisa canal between Buda-
pest and Szolnok on which work has started.

Construction of the Cernavoda-Constantza canal would considerably reduce the im-
portance of the maritime Danube by enabling ocean-going vessels to transship at the
more adequate port of Constantza. Such a canal would thus eliminate the need to
maintain the mouth of the Danube navigable for ocean-going vessels and would reduce
Rumania’s dependence on the USSR in this connection. If the USSR should permit
the Rumanian government to construct this canal, the Kremlin would probably insist
on obtaining controls over it sufficient at least to compensate for the dominant position
derived from its control over the maritime Danube (see Appendix V).
Page-42
, softes

APPENDIX VIII
REPARATIONS AND RESTITUTION

The relative strength of the various postwar Danubian shipping fleets will depend
to a great extent on the final solution of the reparations problem. About 6 percent
of the reparations payments by Rumania and Hungary to the USSR comprise vessels,
technical fleets, harbor machines, and floating docks, most of which must be con-
structed (13 million dollars worth by Hungary and 20 million by Rumania). The
USSR has incorporated some of the 370 river vessels which have already been received
from these countries into the Soviet Danube Shipping Company (SDGP); others are
being used on Soviet inland waterways.

Czechoslovakia has asked that nearly 20 percent of Hungary’s reparations pay-
ments be in the form of ships and shipping facilities.

The problems connected with the definition of external German assets has held
up the settlement of DDSG property in Austria. DDSG assets located in Hungary
and Rumania have been appropriated by the USSR. The Soviets, furthermore, are
claiming all the DDSG property in their zone of Austria. Czechoslovakia and Yugo-
slavia will probably demand river craft as part of their reparations from Germany.

Restitution of vessels has been slow because (a) the US held the vessels in its
possession until freedom of navigation had been provided for in the Satellite peace
treaties; and (b) the Soviets used the vessels they had for the transportation of war
booty and reparations to the USSR. On 11 November 1946, the US announced that it
would return all vessels from the US zones of Austria and Germany to all nations except
Austria and Germany. Approximately 90 vessels have been returned to Czechoslovakia,
220 to Hungary (the US retained 37 Hungarian vessels in Germany as war booty),
170 to Yugoslavia, and 18 to Rumania. The few vessels belonging to Bulgaria, the
Netherlands, France, and the USSR were also returned.

As of December 1947, the USSR had returned all but 15 of the Czechoslovak vessels
and it is in the process of returning those. French and Greek craft were returned in
1946. The USSR also returned a number of vessels to the joint navigation companies
in Hungary and Rumania as part of its capital contribution. In September 1947 the
Soviets returned 46 additional vessels to Hungary, some of which had been damaged
during the war but had been repaired.

Since the total number of United Nations vessels turned over to the USSR by the
Armistice Agreements * for use during the war and the total number of ex-enemy vessels
seized by the USSR as war booty are not known, it is impossible to ascertain exactly
how many of these vessels are still held by the USSR. The number is probably small.

* Article IX for Rumania and Hungary and XIV for Bulgaria.

sofer 28
Page-43
APPENDIX IX
IRON GATE

One of the features of the Danube which has always demanded special attention
is the Iron Gate, one of the Carpathian gorges. Situated between the Rumanian
ports of Turnu Severin and Orsova, the 7,500-foot gorge is interlaced with rocky
barriers and reefs which make navigation hazardous at low water. The narrowness
of the channel and the swift current (up to 10 knots) add to the navigational difficulties.
Although five attempts have been made to blast channels in this section of the river,
the Iron Gate remains the bottleneck of the Danube. Vessels larger than 1,000 tons
cannot pass through the Iron Gate and tugs moving upstream must reduce the number
of barges in tow and use a steam locomotive, located on the Yugoslav side. Night
navigation is impossible.

Because of these difficulties, the need for special administration of the Iron Gate
has long been recognized. An Iron Gate Administration (APF) was set up under the
Danube Statute of 1921 to maintain and improve the condition of this sector of the
Danube. Rumania, Yugoslavia, and the International Danube Commission were repre-
sented on the APF. During the war, Rumania and Yugoslavia successfully opposed
German attempts to gain absolute control over the Iron Gate.

The present legal status of the APF is obscure. Early in 1945 a joint Rumanian-
Yugoslav committee was established to take care of the technical aspects of navigation
through the Iron Gate. As far as is known, this provisional committee is still function-
ing with a Soviet representative as observer. Originally the committee considered itself
as the legal caretaker for the old APF until such time as the International Danube
Commission was re-established. Since that time, however, plans have probably ma-
terialized for a new Rumanian-Yugoslav agreement which, by eliminating any reference
to the prewar APF, will be more in consonance with the Soviet line that all prewar
international Danube agreements are now invalid.

Bulgaria, Rumania, and Yugoslavia have discussed cooperative plans for the im-
provement and development of the Iron Gate. No definite decision has yet been
reached, however, and in view of the technical difficulties involved, it will probably be
some years before any far-reaching plan can be implemented. At present the Satel-
lites are attempting to obtain blueprints (the only known copies are in the US and
UK zones of Germany) of a scheme worked out by the Germans during the war, which
would eliminate the navigation bottleneck as well as provide between 1,200,000 and
1,800,000 HP of electricity.

29 oyfer
Page-44
-

APPENDIX X
DANUBIAN TVA

In February 1948, representatives from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Ru-
mania, and Bulgaria met to discuss a program for a “TVA” of the Danube which would
include expanded use of inland waterways, flood control, canalization, bridge con-
struction, and electric power projects. Another conference of engineers and special-
ists was held in March, at which technical questions relating to this program were
studied.

Such a program could only be implemented through joint riparian cooperation
since the individual countries cannot supply the capital and technical help needed
to carry out improvements in the Danube channel, much less an extensive program of
agricultural and hydroelectric projects. If successfully completed, the venture would
vastly increase the economic potential of the Danubian countries by irrigating an ad-
ditional 10 million acres, developing cheap electricity and permitting the moderniza-
tion of agriculture and the establishment of new industries. Although political con-
ditions are ripe for such a program — which presumably will be pushed by the USSR —
lack of capital equipment, labor, and materials will delay its execution for some time.

ofter 30
Page-45
SE

APPENDIX XI
PUBLIC STATEMENTS OF SOVIET DANUBE POLICY

As early as 1940 the Soviet Union indicated what its policy would be in regard to
the Danube. In answer toa protest by Great Britain on the calling by the USSR of the
Bucharest Conference on 28 October 1940, it replied:

“. .. The USSR is forced to recognize as incorrect the assertion of the British
Government to the effect that the recognition by the Soviet Government of the
necessity of creating a new Danube Commission and the participation of the Soviet
Union in the conversations at Bucharest constitute a violation of neutrality. The
formation of a Danube Commission with the participation of the Soviet Union and
also of the states bordering on the Danube or close to the Danube constitutes the re-
establishment of justice which was violated by the Versailles and other treaties by
virtue of which the Soviet Union was eliminated from the composition of not only the
International but also of the European Danube Commissions.

“The Danube Commission must naturally be composed of the representatives of
the states bordering on the Danube or closely connected with the Danube or utilizing
the Danube as a channel for trade (for example, Italy).

“It is understandable that Great Britain separated from the Danube by thousands
of kilometers cannot be counted among the number of such states... .”

What is probably the most recent expression of the Soviet view was outlined in a
pamphlet by Professor Durdenevski who stated, “It is necessary that no outside forces
prevent the Danubian states from building their own future for themselves” and as-
serted that British-American interest in the Danube was in no way justified. While
conceding that the principle of equality for commercial shipping on the Danube should
be recognized, he insisted that non-Danubian powers should not be permitted to send
“military” ships onto the river; on the other hand, he claimed that Soviet war vessels
should be allowed free passage from the upper Tisa in Soviet territory to the mouth
of the Danube, also in Soviet territory. The Professor claimed that a commission com-
posed of the riparian states only would eliminate “every kind of intrigue arising from
non-Danubian countries.”

The Soviets have repeatedly reiterated this policy not only in their own declara-
tions but also through their Communist spokesmen in the Danubian countries. The
approach taken with regard to the European Danube Commission (CED) was pub-
lished in a Bucharest newspaper in October 1946. There is no need for the CED, the
article stated, because (a) it did not accomplish its technical duties before the war;
(b) the situation is different from what it was in 1856 when CED was formed — Ru-

31 RET
Page-46
wo

mania now being capable of taking care of the Danube mouth; (c) the CED set tariffs
much higher than those on the Elbe or Rhine to the detriment of the Rumanian gov-
ernment; (d) the CED interfered in the authority of the Rumanian government; (e)
the CED was gradually transformed from a technical body into a commercial enterprise.

Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Clementis in an interview in November 1947 em-
phasized that the “solution of the Danube problem should be left exclusively to ri-
parian states.” He agreed, however, that the river should be open to vessels of all
nations under equal terms.

Since the summer of 1947, a series of bilateral agreements between the Danubian
states have been concluded which lay down a joint Policy of riparian administration
of the Danube. Rumania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia all
agreed “to follow an identical policy with view to safeguarding the rights and interests
of the riparian states.”

SEQREY 32
Page-47
APPENDIX XII
NOTE

Further details concerning the Danube can be found in the following documents:

The Danube River and its Control Since 1938, Office of Strategic Services R & A #2667,
20 January 1945. (Unrestricted)

The Danube Organization of Shipping Companies, Department of State OIR #3544.3,
17 May 1946. (Secret)

Recent Danube Negotiations Regarding Freedom of Navigation, Department of State
Intelligence Mem OCL 3700.4, 30 September 1946. (Secret)

Contract for the Lease of the Port of Budapest (Csepel), Navy Department ONI 64-47,
13 August 1947, Budapest. (Confidential)

Considerations Bearing on New International Danube Regulations, Department of State
OIR #4355, 10 April 1947. (Confidential)

Brief Descriptions of all Usable Rumanian Ports on the Danube, Navy Department ONI
64-47, 13 August 1947, Bucharest. (Confidential)

The Negotiation of the Treaties of Peace with Italy, Rumania, Bulgaria and Hungary,
Department of State Part I “History of Negotiations re Danube” pp. 458-486, Oc-
tober 1947. (Secret)

Three technical reports which give the navigational plan for the postwar Danube:

From the Mouth of the Danube to Vienna, Navy Department ONI 77-46, 24 October
1946, Bucharest. (Confidential)

From the St. George Channel Mouth to Braila via Sulina Mouth, Navy Department
ONI 47-46, 5 July 1946, Bucharest. (Confidential)

From Braila to Bratislava, CIG SO 7768, 11. September 1947, London. (Secret)

pf
Page-48
THE DANUBE
PHYSICAL FEATURES
19 NAVIGABILITY. 1948
Page-49
area
A Naess LMS EN & hee
SERRA EE
es (OES ASE RES oe
ee ek

  

fr eS ws
Page-50
DISTRIBUTION

‘The President

Secretary of Btate

Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief
Secretary of Defense

Secretary of the Army

Secretary of the Navy

Secretary of the Air Force

Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Chairman, National Security Resources Board
Chiet of Staff, US Army

Chief of Naval Operations

Chief of Staff, US Air Force

Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, US Army
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations)
Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force

 

Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Research and Intelligence

Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army
Chief of Naval Intelligence

Director of Intelligence, US Air Force
Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group

Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee

Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission
Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission

Chief, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State
Page-51
go OT ai vit Bre .

 

U. 8, GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
2713—S—1948