
Page-1
NLT.00!,.090.001/3 a

Ss
Seerét a

by F 2% KieacE,
“FB os ([#t. fun

“ tq hts sfro

SPECIAL
MEMORANDUM

 

BOARD OF
NATIONAL ESTIMATES

Ghana’s Political and Economic Malaise

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: MAY 2003

ret
1

19 July 1967
No. 5-67
Page-2
“Sree

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

19 July 1967

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 5-67
SUBJECT: Ghana's Political and Economic Malaise

‘SUMMARY

Ghana's ruling militayy-police junta is grappling with the
economic and political mess left by Nkrumah. But economic problems
are piling up and the government is unsure of how to return to
constitutional rule. The junta relies heavily on US aid and advice ,
and looks to the US for increasing econamic support. Yet even
with greatly increased US aid, Ghana is not likely in the next
several years to make substantial progress toward econumic growth
and political stability. Indeed, a regime decidedly less friendly
to the US might come to power asa result of the slow pace of na-

tional reconstruction.
WHRHHHEE

¥ This memorandun was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared
by the Office of National Estimates and coordinated with the Office
of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research in the
Directorate of Intelligence.
Page-3
I. INTRODUCTION

1. Under Nkrumah, Ghana commanded headlines as pacesetter
of independence in West Africa, and as one of the leaders of the
radical nations of the Third World. But in the process Nkrumah,
like Sukarno and Ben Bella, made a shambles of his nation's po-
litical and economic foundations before he was called to account.
He squandered Ghana's $500 million foreign exchange reserves (der-
ived largely from cocoa sales at high world prices in the early
and mid-1950's), and ran up new foreign debts of sane $700 million
for prestige projects, a variety of unsound state enterprises, and
political and diplomatic activities designed to further his own
continental ambitions. Now, a year and a half after his ouster,
the consequences of his follies have become clear, and Ghana is
resuming a character more in keeping with its limited resources
and prospects. For Ghana, while better endowed with natural res-
ources and trained personnel than most of its hapless West African
neighbors (e.g. Togo), still is essentially a one-crop economy,
with a per capita national income of only about US $200.

2. From the outset, the ruling National Liberation Council
(Mic), a military-police junta, has sought aid and advice from the
US in a multitude of economic, financial, administrative, and
Page-4
AEE

security matters. In large measure, this stems from the NIC's
strong pro-Western political inclinations and from its disap-
pointment over lack of support from other Western countries. Its
close rapport with the US was dramatically demonstrated during
the abortive coup in April, when high ranking Ghanaian officials
sought refuge or assistance in US official residences. More re-
cently, the US has considerably increased its aid commitments to
Ghana and is considering the scope of future assistance.

II. THE CURRENT SITUATION AND SHORT TERM OUTLOOK
A. Economic

3. To some extent, Ghanaian political stability hinges upon
the NLC's success in attacking the national economic mess. Over
the past five years, economic growth has barely kept pace with
the increase in population (about 2.6 percent per year). The NLC
has made some progress. By trimming the budget, cancelling prestige
projects, lopping off some notoriously unprofitable state enter-
prises, and tightening control over others, it has helped curb in-
flation. Yet the rehabilitation of Ghana's economy has scarcely
begun, and there was substantially no increase in economic output
during 1966.

C-R-E-T
Page-5
“Preng

4. The most pressing problem is to obtain sufficient foreign
exchange to pay for food imports ($50 million a year) and the raw
materials, spare parts, and machinery needed for the restoration
of production and efficiency in industry and transport. In 1966,
export earnings ($270 million) were no higher than in the 1950's
and fell short of imports by over $80 million. Ghana's cocoa
exports doubled in volume from the early 1950's to the early 1960's,
but earnings stagnated because of the decline of prices in the world
market. In recent years, production has failed to rise Decause
pesticides and fertilizers have not been available and because
prices paid to cocoa farmers by the government marketing board
have been low. Other export industries (timber, gold, and dia-
monds) are in the doldrums because of depleted resources, obsolete

equipment, or rising production and transportation costs.

d+ At the same time, foreign exchange reserves are depleted
and additional short term borrowing is. limited by terms of an agree-
ment with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Loans of the
type permitted by the IMF will help to reduce this year's foreign
exchange gap, e.g., the US is providing about $35 million in PL
480 and commodity import loans. Nevertheless, Ghana will probably
not be able to afford the increase of imports it has planned for
1967.
Page-6
SEORET

6. Economic prospects over the next few years are scarcely
more encouraging. Though there will be some improvements in the
picture, in particular the increased production of aluminum from
the new Kaiser-Reynolds VALCO plant, there appears to be Little
prospect for any very substantial increase in export earnings.
Moreover, Ghana now has a foreign debt of some $800 million, of
which over $100 million is due in FY 1969 alone. It will need much
more external assistance than is now in sight to meet these pay-
ments and at the same time finance essential imports. Some relief
can be expected by the rescheduling of debt service payments,
already envisaged by the IMF; but Ghana will almost certainly look
to the US for increased financial support over the next few years.

B. Political

7. The April coup attempt, though it collapsed of its om
ineptitude, raised questions regarding political stability and the
role of the NLC. The junior officers who directed the coup were
inspired by personal ambition, grievances over neglect of the amy,
and suspicions of corruption in the regime. Insofar as the public
was aware of a coup, it sided with the NLC, though some 1,000 die-
hard Nkrumah supporters were subsequently jailed for prematurely

S- -E-T
Page-7
“jubilating" over its demise. However » allegations of corruption
are widely believed, and an undercurrent of disillusion pervades

the scene.

8. By and large, the political vacuum left by Nkrumah's
ouster persists. The NLC appears uncertain of how to regain public
confidence. Most members are well-intentioned and fairly honest,
and sppear to understand generally the country's plight; yet they
find it difficult to ignite any Spark of enthusiasm for civic or
economic action. They are disappointed with the lack-luster per-
formance of the civil service, a body well regarded by its British
mentors at independence, but degraded and demoralized under Nkrumah.
Tre NLC is installing a kind of sub-cabinet of civilian special
commlasioners to direct some of the ministries, in the hope that
this will revitalize the bureaucracy and at the same time allay
the mounting pressure from the educated elite for a restoration of
civilian rule.

9. Despite the NLC's ban on politics, some thinly veiled
political activity goes on, but no figure has yet appeared who
has popular appeal or could lead the country. Most of the older
politicians either are tarred with the Nkrumah brush or, like
Page-8
Ronee

the former leader of opposition to Nerumah, Dr. Kofi Busia, heve
lost their touch and most of their following during their years

of exile. General Ankrah and one or two others in the NLC would
probably run for office if constitutional procedures were restored,
but they would find it hard to overcome popular suspicions of
corruption and criticiam for the sluggish performance of the economy.
For these reasons, it is now very difficult to foresee when a

civilian successor regime may re-emerge or who might lead it.

10. Nonetheless, there is little likelihood that the NLC will
be threatened by populer uprisings or civilian plots, at least for
the next year or two. The current high level of urban unemployment
poses little immediate threat to the regime, for the traditional
African system of extended family obligations alleviates some dis-
tress. The civil service and the labor unions grumble, but are

unlikely to formulate or join plots against the government.

11. Problems posed by the army are more likely to trouble
the NLC or any civilian successor which might emerge. The 15,000-
man force, largely created by Nkrumah as a prestige symbol, serves
little useful purpose. The NLC hes not found a role for the army
to play in national development, nor is it willing to disband any
substantial part of the force, in part because of the scarcity

-T-

Pree
Page-9
of jobs elsewhere. Indeed, because of worries about the loyalty

of the army, the NLC may decide to allocate even more funds to

the military from a tight national budget. The fact that a mil-

itary coup easily turned out Nkrumah, end that the haphazard at-
tempted coup of last April against the NLC caught both the government
and the bulk of the military by surprise, may encourage other military

figures to new adventures.

TII. LONGER TERM PROSPECTS

12. Over the next three to five years Ghana's prospects for
economic growth will be largely dependent on a rise in cocoa earnings,
a@ substantial increase in domestic food production, a greater popular
acceptance of econemic and civic tasks, prolonged forbearance by
principal foreign creditors, and a continued high level of external

economic aid.

13. It would be unrealistic to expect all or many of these
developments in Ghana during this period. Foreign creditors will
probably reluctantly agree to debt postponement, because they will
have little other choice. Continued large-scale external assistance,
if forthcoming, would further ease foreign exchange stringencies, but
political and economic rehabilitation will have to come largely from

-8-

oe
Page-10
EO 12958 6.2(c)

 

within. Even if capable and dynamic national leadership emerges,

the economic malaise is likely to persist for some time. That is
to say, there can be scant assurance that over the next few years
even with greatly increased external economic assistance, Ghana
will be much more than a debt-ridden West African coastal state
with uncertain political stability and orientation.

1k. The NLC or almost any likely civilian successor will
continue to look primarily to the US for help in a variety of
ways, but many Ghanaians have exaggerated expectations of what
the US can do for them. Hence part of the bleme for slow
Progress will fall on the US. Popular demagogues or disaffected
military leaders will then likely claim that the US is not
sufficiently attentive to Ghanaian needs, and that more radical
solutions are needed. In these circumstances, a regime leas
friendly to the Us, certainly more nationalistic, and probably

more radical, could come to power.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES;

 

 

 

S-E-G.R-E-T