
Page-1
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expértsp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

1 of 51

 

Global Trends 2015:

A Dialogue About the Future With

Nongovernment Experts

 

NIC 2000-02, December

 

   

 

 

This paper was approved for publication by the National Foreign Intelligence Board under the authority
of the Director of Central Intelligence.

Prepared under the direction of the National Intelligence Council.

Letter from the Director of Central Intelligence
Letter from the Chairman of the National Intelligence Council

 

Note on Process

In undertaking this comprehensive analysis, the NIC worked actively with a range of nongovernmental
institutions and experts. We began the analysis with two workshops focusing on drivers and alternative
futures, as the appendix describes. Subsequently, numerous specialists from academia and the private
sector contributed to every aspect of the study, from demographics to developments in science and
technology, from the global arms market to implications for the United States. Many of the judgments in
this paper derive from our efforts to distill the diverse views expressed at these conferences or related
workshops. Major conferences cosponsored by the NIC with other government and private centers in
support of Global Trends 2015 included:

Foreign Reactions to the Revolution in Military Affairs (Georgetown University).

Evolution of the Nation-State (University of Maryland).

Trends in Democratization (CIA and academic experts).

American Economic Power (Industry & Trade Strategies, San Francisco, CA).

Transformation of Defense Industries (International Institute for Strategic Studies, London, UK).

Alternative Futures in War and Conflict (Defense Intelligence Agency and Naval War College,

Newport, RI, and CIA).

Out of the Box and Into the Future: A Dialogue Between Warfighters and Scientists on Far

Future Warfare (Potomac Institute, Arlington, VA).

Future Threat Technologies Symposium (MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA).

The Global Course of the Information Revolution: Technological Trends (RAND Corporation,

Santa Monica, CA).

e The Global Course of the Information Revolution: Political, Economic, and Social

Consequences (RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA).

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-2
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

2 of 51

e The Middle East: The Media, Information Technology, and the Internet (The National
Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, DC).

¢ Global Migration Trends and Their Implications for the United States (Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace, Washington, DC).

e Alternative Global Futures: 2000-2015 (Department of State/Bureau of Intelligence and Research
and CJA's Global Futures Project).

In October 2000, the draft report was discussed with outside experts, including Richard Cooper and
Joseph Nye (Harvard University), Richard Haass (Brookings Institution), James Steinberg (Markle
Foundation), and Jessica Mathews (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace). Their comments and
suggestions are incorporated in the report. Daniel Yergin (Cambridge Energy Research Associates)
reviewed and commented on the final draft.

 

Contents

Note on Process
Overview
The Drivers and Trends

Key Uncertainties: Technology Will Alter Outcomes
Key Challenges to Governance: People Will Decide

Discussion

Population Trends
Divergent Aging Patterns

Movement of People
Health

Natural Resources and Environment
Food
Water
Energy
Environment
Science and Technology
Information Technology
Biotechnology
Other Technologies
The Global Economy
Dynamism and Growth
Unequal Growth Prospects and Distribution

Economic Crises and Resilience
National and International Governance
Nonstate Actors

Criminal Organizations and Networkss

Changing Communal Identities and Networks
Overall Impacts on States

 

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001
1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-3
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdéittp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

International Cooperation

Future Conflict
Internal Conflicts
Transnational Terrorism
Interstate Conflicts

Reacting to US Military Superiority

Major Regions
East and Southeast Asia

South Asia
Russia and Eurasia
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Europe
Canada
Latin America
Appendix
Four Alternative Global Futures

 

 

 

 

 

Overview

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue About the Future With
Nongovernment Experts

Over the past 15 months, the National Intelligence Council (NIC), in close collaboration with US
Government specialists and a wide range of experts outside the government, has worked to identify
major drivers and trends that will shape the world of 2015.

The key drivers identified are:
(1) Demographics.
(2) Natural resources and environment.
(3) Science and technology.
(4) The global economy and globalization.
(5) National and international governance.
(6) Future conflict.
(7) The role of the United States.
In examining these drivers, several points should be kept in mind:
e No single driver or trend will dominate the global future in 2015.

e Each driver will have varying impacts in different regions and countries.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-4
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expétttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

 

¢ The drivers are not necessarily mutually reinforcing; in some cases, they will work at
cross-purposes.

Taken together, these drivers and trends intersect to create an integrated picture of the world of 2015,
about which we can make projections with varying degrees of confidence and identify some troubling
uncertainties of strategic importance to the United States.

The Methodology

Global Trends 2015 provides a flexible framework to discuss and debate the future. The methodology
is useful for our purposes, although admittedly inexact for the social scientist. Our purpose is to rise
above short-term, tactical considerations and provide a longer-term, strategic perspective. Judgments
about demographic and natural resource trends are based primarily on informed extrapolation of existing
trends. In contrast, many judgments about science and technology, economic growth, globalization,
governance, and the nature of conflict represent a distillation of views of experts inside and outside the
United States Government. The former are projections about natural phenomena, about which we can
have fairly high confidence; the latter are more speculative because they are contingent upon the
decisions that societies and governments will make.

The drivers we emphasize will have staying power. Some of the trends will persist; others will be less
enduring and may change course over the time frame we consider. The major contribution of the
National Intelligence Council (NIC), assisted by experts from the Intelligence Community, has been to
harness US Government and nongovernmental specialists to identify drivers, to determine which ones
matter most, to highlight key uncertainties, and to integrate analysis of these trends into a national
security context. The result identifies issues for more rigorous analysis and quantification.

 

 

 

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-5
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.htm!

 

 

 

 

 

The Drivers and Trends

Demographics
World population in 2015 will be 7.2 billion, up from 6.1 billion in the year 2000, and in most countries,

people will live longer. Ninety-five percent of the increase will be in developing countries, nearly all in
rapidly expanding urban areas. Where political systems are brittle, the combination of population growth
and urbanization will foster instability. Increasing lifespans will have significantly divergent impacts.

e In the advanced economies—and a growing number of emerging market countries—declining

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001
5 of 51 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-6
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

6 of 51

 

birthrates and aging will combine to increase health care and pension costs while reducing the
relative size of the working population, straining the social contract, and leaving significant
shortfalls in the size and capacity of the work force.

e In some developing countries, these same trends will combine to expand the size of the working
population and reduce the youth bulge—increasing the potential for economic growth and political
stability.

Natural Resources and Environment

Overall food production will be adequate to feed the world's growing population, but poor infrastructure
and distribution, political instability, and chronic poverty will lead to malnourishment in parts of
Sub-Saharan Africa. The potential for famine will persist in countries with repressive government
policies or internal conflicts. Despite a 50 percent increase in global energy demand, energy resources
will be sufficient to meet demand; the latest estimates suggest that 80 percent of the world's available oil
and 95 percent of its gas remain underground.

e Although the Persian Gulf region will remain the world's largest single source of oil, the global
energy market is likely to encompass two relatively distinct patterns of regional distribution: one
serving consumers (including the United States) from Atlantic Basin reserves; and the other
meeting the needs of primarily Asian customers (increasingly China and India) from Persian Gulf
supplies and, to a lesser extent, the Caspian region and Central Asia.

¢ In contrast to food and energy, water scarcities and allocation will pose significant challenges to
governments in the Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and northern China. Regional
tensions over water will be heightened by 2015.

Science and Technology

Fifteen years ago, few predicted the profound impact of the revolution in information technology.
Looking ahead another 15 years, the world will encounter more quantum leaps in information
technology (IT) and in other areas of science and technology. The continuing diffusion of information
technology and new applications of biotechnology will be at the crest of the wave. IT will be the major
building block for international commerce and for empowering nonstate actors. Most experts agree that
the IT revolution represents the most significant global transformation since the Industrial Revolution
beginning in the mid-eighteenth century.

e The integration—or fusion—of continuing revolutions in information technology, biotechnology,
materials science, and nanotechnology will generate a dramatic increase in investment in
technology, which will further stimulate innovation within the more advanced countries.

e Older technologies will continue lateral "sidewise development" into new markets and applications
through 2015, benefiting US allies and adversaries around the world who are interested in acquiring
early generation ballistic missile and weapons of mass destruction (WMD) technologies.

e Biotechnology will drive medical breakthroughs that will enable the world's wealthiest people to
improve their health and increase their longevity dramatically. At the same time, genetically
modified crops will offer the potential to improve nutrition among the world's one billion
malnourished people.

e Breakthroughs in materials technology will generate widely available products that are
multi-functional, environmentally safe, longer lasting, and easily adapted to particular consumer
requirements.

- Disaffected states, terrorists, proliferators, narcotraffickers, and organized criminals will take
advantage of the new high-speed information environment and other advances in technology to
integrate their illegal activities and compound their threat to stability and security around the world.

The Global Economy and Globalization

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

 

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-7
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expédrtip://www .internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 15/index.html

 

 

The networked global economy will be driven by rapid and largely unrestricted flows of information,
ideas, cultural values, capital, goods and services, and people: that is, globalization. This globalized
economy will be a net contributor to increased political stability in the world in 2015, although its reach
and benefits will not be universal. In contrast to the Industrial Revolution, the process of globalization is
more compressed. Its evolution will be rocky, marked by chronic financial volatility and a widening
economic divide.

¢ The global economy, overall, will return to the high levels of growth reached in the 1960s and early
1970s. Economic growth will be driven by political pressures for higher living standards, improved
economic policies, rising foreign trade and investment, the diffusion of information technologies,
and an increasingly dynamic private sector. Potential brakes on the global economy—such as a
sustained financial crisis or prolonged disruption of energy supplies—could undo this optimistic
projection.

e Regions, countries, and groups feeling left behind will face deepening economic stagnation,
political instability, and cultural alienation. They will foster political, ethnic, ideological, and
religious extremism, along with the violence that often accompanies it. They will force the United
States and other developed countries to remain focused on "old-world" challenges while
concentrating on the implications of "new-world" technologies at the same time.

National and International Governance

States will continue to be the dominant players on the world stage, but governments will have less and
less control over flows of information, technology, diseases, migrants, arms, and financial transactions,
whether licit or illicit, across their borders. Nonstate actors ranging from business firms to nonprofit
organizations will play increasingly larger roles in both national and international affairs. The quality of
governance, both nationally and internationally, will substantially determine how well states and
societies cope with these global forces.

e States.with competent governance, including the United States, will adapt government structures to
a dramatically changed global environment—making them better able to engage with a more
interconnected world. The responsibilities of once "semiautonomous" government agencies
increasingly will intersect because of the transnational nature of national security priorities and
because of the clear requirement for interdisciplinary policy responses. Shaping the complex,
fast-moving world of 2015 will require reshaping traditional government structures.

« Effective governance will increasingly be determined by the ability and agility to form partnerships
to exploit increased information flows, new technologies, migration, and the influence of nonstate
actors. Most but not all countries that succeed will be representative democracies.

e States with ineffective and incompetent governance not only will fail to benefit from globalization,
but in some instances will spawn conflicts at home and abroad, ensuring an even wider gap
between regional winners and losers than exists today.

Globalization will increase the transparency of government decision-making, complicating the ability of
authoritarian regimes to maintain control, but also complicating the traditional deliberative processes of
democracies. Increasing migration will create influential diasporas, affecting policies, politics and even
national identity in many countries. Globalization also will create increasing demands for international

cooperation on transnational issues, but the response of both states and international organizations will
fall short in 2015.

Future Conflict
The United States will maintain a strong technological edge in IT-driven "battlefield awareness" and in
precision-guided weaponry in 2015. The United States will face three types of threats:

e Asymmetric threats in which state and nonstate adversaries avoid direct engagements with the US
military but devise strategies, tactics, and weapons—some improved by "sidewise" technology—to
minimize US strengths and exploit perceived weaknesses;

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001
1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-8
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdnttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm!

8 of 51

 

¢ Strategic WMD threats, including nuclear missile threats, in which (barring significant political or
economic changes) Russia, China, most likely North Korea, probably Iran, and possibly Iraq have
the capability to strike the United States, and the potential for unconventional delivery of WMD by
both states or nonstate actors also will grow; and

e Regional military threats in which a few countries maintain large military forces with a mix of Cold
War and post-Cold War concepts and technologies.

The risk of war among developed countries will be low. The international community will continue,
however, to face conflicts around the world, ranging from relatively frequent small-scale internal
upheavals to less frequent regional interstate wars. The potential for conflict will arise from rivalries in
Asia, ranging from India-Pakistan to China-Taiwan, as well as among the antagonists in the Middle
East. Their potential lethality will grow, driven by the availability of WMD, longer-range missile
delivery systems and other technologies.

Internal conflicts stemming from religious, ethnic, economic or political disputes will remain at current
levels or even increase in number. The United Nations and regional organizations will be called upon to
manage such conflicts because major states—stressed by domestic concerns, perceived risk of failure,
lack of political will, or tight resources—will minimize their direct involvement.

Export control regimes and sanctions will be less effective because of the diffusion of technology,
porous borders, defense industry consolidations, and reliance upon foreign markets to maintain
profitability. Arms and weapons technology transfers will be more difficult to control.

e Prospects will grow that more sophisticated weaponry, including weapons of mass
destruction—indigenously produced or externally acquired—will get into the hands of state and
nonstate belligerents, some hostile to the United States. The likelihood will increase over this

« period that WMD will be used either against the United States or its forces, facilities, and interests
overseas,

Role of the United States

The United States will continue to be a major force in the world community. US global economic,
technological, military, and diplomatic influence will be unparalleled among nations as well as regional
and international organizations in 2015. This power not only will ensure America's preeminence, but
also will cast the United States as a key driver of the international system.

The United States will continue to be identified throughout the world as the leading proponent and
beneficiary of globalization. US economic actions, even when pursued for such domestic goals as

adjusting interest rates, will have a major global impact because of the tighter integration of global
markets by 2015.

e The United States will remain in the vanguard of the technological revolution from information to
biotechnology and beyond.

¢ Both allies and adversaries will factor continued US military pre-eminence in their calculations of
national security interests and ambitions.

e Some states—adversaries and allies—will try at times to check what they see as American
"hegemony." Although this posture will not translate into strategic, broad-based and enduring
anti-US coalitions, it will lead to tactical alignments on specific policies and demands for a greater
role in international political and economic institutions.

Diplomacy will be more complicated. Washington will have greater difficulty harnessing its power to
achieve specific foreign policy goals: the US Government will exercise a smaller and less powerful part
of the overall economic and cultural influence of the United States abroad.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-9
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdrttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

 

» In the absence of a clear and overriding national security threat, the United States will have
difficulty drawing on its economic prowess to advance its foreign policy agenda. The top priority of
the American private sector, which will be central to maintaining the US economic and
technological lead, will be financial profitability, not foreign policy objectives. —

¢ The United States also will have greater difficulty building coalitions to support its policy goals,
although the international community will often turn to Washington, even if reluctantly, to lead
multilateral efforts in real and potential conflicts.

e There will be increasing numbers of important actors on the world stage to challenge and check—as
well as to reinforce—US leadership: countries such as China, Russia, India, Mexico, and Brazil;
regional organizations such as the European Union; and a vast array of increasingly powerful
multinational corporations and nonprofit organizations with their own interests to defend in the
world.

Key Uncertainties: Technology Will Alter Outcomes

Examining the interaction of these drivers and trends points to some major uncertainties that will only be
clarified as events occur and leaders make policy decisions that cannot be foreseen today. We cite eight
transnational and regional issues for which the future, according to our trends analysis, is too tough to
call with any confidence or precision.

¢ These are high-stakes, national security issues that will require continuous analysis and, in
the view of our conferees, periodic policy review in the years ahead.

Science and Technology

We know that the possibility is greater than ever that the revolution in science and technology will
improve the quality of life. What we know about this revolution is exciting. Advances in science and
technology will generate dramatic breakthroughs in agriculture and health and in leap-frog applications,
such as universal wireless cellular communications, which already are networking developing countries
that never had land-lines. What we do not know about the S&T revolution, however, is staggering. We
do not know to what extent technology will benefit, or further disadvantage, disaffected national
populations, alienated ethnic and religious groups, or the less developed countries. We do not know to
what degree lateral or "side-wise" technology will increase the threat from low technology countries and
groups. One certainty is that progression will not be linear. Another is that as future technologies
emerge, people will lack full awareness of their wider economic, environmental, cultural, legal, and
moral impact—or the continuing potential for research and development.

Advances in science and technology will pose national security challenges of uncertain character and
scale.

e Increasing reliance on computer networks is making critical US infrastructures more attractive as
targets. Computer network operations today offer new options for attacking the United States
within its traditional continental sanctuary—potentially anonymously and with selective effects.
Nevertheless, we do not know how quickly or effectively such adversaries as terrorists or
disaffected states will develop the tradecraft to use cyber warfare tools and technology, or, in fact,
whether cyber warfare will ever evolve into a decisive combat arm.

¢ Rapid advances and diffusion of biotechnology, nanotechnology, and the materials sciences,
moreover, will add to the capabilities of our adversaries to engage in biological warfare or
bio-terrorism.

Asymmetric Warfare

As noted earlier, most adversaries will recognize the information advantage and military superiority of

the United States in 2015. Rather than acquiesce to any potential US military domination, they will try

to circumvent or minimize US strengths and exploit perceived weaknesses. [T-driven globalization will

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-10
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

significantly increase interaction among terrorists, narcotraffickers, weapons proliferators, and organized
criminals, who in a networked world will have greater access to information, to technology, to finance,
to sophisticated deception-and-denial techniques and to each other. Such asymmetric
approaches—whether undertaken by states or nonstate actors—will become the dominant characteristic
of most threats to the US homeland. They will be a defining challenge for US strategy, operations, and
force development, and they will require that strategy to maintain focus on traditional, low-technology
threats as well as the capacity of potential adversaries to harness elements of proliferating advanced
technologies. At the same time, we do not know the extent to which adversaries, state and nonstate,

might be influenced or deterred by other geopolitical, economic, technological, or diplomatic factors in
2015.

The Global Economy
Although the outlook for the global economy appears strong, achieving broad and sustained high levels
of global growth will be contingent on avoiding several potential brakes to growth. These include:

The US economy suffers a sustained downturn. Given its large trade deficit and low domestic
savings, the US economy—the most important driver of recent global growth—is vulnerable to a loss of
international confidence in its growth prospects that could lead to a sharp downturn, which, if long
lasting, would have deleterious economic and policy consequences for the rest of the world.

Europe and Japan fail to manage their demographic challenges. European and Japanese populations
are aging rapidly, requiring more than 110 million new workers by 2015 to maintain current dependency
ratios between the working population and retirees. Conflicts over social services or immigration
policies in major European states could dampen economic growth.

China and/or India fail to sustain high growth. China's ambitious goals for reforming its economy
will be difficult to achieve: restructuring state-owned enterprises, cleaning up and transforming the
banking system, and cutting the government's employment rolls in half. Growth would slow if these
reforms go off-track. Failure by India to implement reforms would prevent it from achieving sustained
growth.

Emerging market countries fail to reform their financial institutions. Many emerging market
countries have not yet undertaken the financial reforms needed to help them survive the next economic
crisis. Absent such reform, a series of future economic crises in emerging market countries probably will
dry up the capital flows crucial for high rates of economic growth.

Global energy supplies suffer a major disruption. Turbulence in global energy supplies would have a
devastating effect. Such a result could be driven by conflict among key energy-producing states,
sustained internal instability in two or more major energy-producing states, or major terrorist actions.

The Middle East

Global trends from demography and natural resources to globalization and governance appear generally

negative for the Middle East. Most regimes are change-resistant. Many are buoyed by continuing energy
revenues and will not be inclined to make the necessary reforms, including in basic education, to change
this unfavorable picture.

- Linear trend analysis shows little positive change in the region, raising the prospects for increased
demographic pressures, social unrest, religious and ideological extremism, and terrorism directed
both at the regimes and at their Western supporters.

e Nonlinear developments—such as the sudden rise of a Web-connected opposition, a sharp and
sustained economic downturn, or, conversely, the emergence of enlightened leaders committed to
good governance—might change outcomes in individual countries. Political changes in Iran in the
late 1990s are an example of such nonlinear development.

China
Estimates of developments in China over the next 15 years are fraught with unknowables. Working
APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001
1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-11
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

11 of 51

against China's aspirations to sustain economic growth while preserving its political system is an array
of political, social, and economic pressures that will increasingly challenge the regime's legitimacy, and
perhaps its survival.

« The sweeping structural changes required by China's entry into the World Trade Organization
(WTO) and the broader demands of economic globalization and the information revolution will
generate significantly new levels and types of social and economic disruption that will only add to
an already wide range of domestic and international problems.

Nevertheless, China need not be overwhelmed by these problems. China has proven politically resilient,
economically dynamic, and increasingly assertive in positioning itself for a leadership role in East Asia.
Its long-term military program in particular suggests that Beijing wants to have the capability to achieve
its territorial objectives, outmatch its neighbors, and constrain US power in the region.

¢ We do not rule out the introduction of enough political reform by 2015 to allow China to adapt to
domestic pressure for change and to continue to grow economically.

Two conditions, in the view of many specialists, would lead to a major security challenge for the United
States and its allies in the region: a weak, disintegrating China, or an assertive China willing to use its
growing economic wealth and military capabilities to pursue its strategic advantage in the region. These
opposite extremes bound a more commonly held view among experts that China will continue to see
peace as essential to its economic growth and internal stability.

Russia

Between now and 2015, Moscow will be challenged even more than today to adjust its expectations for
world leadership to its dramatically reduced resources. Whether the country can make the transition in
adjusting ends to means remains an open and critical question, according to most experts, as does the
question of the character and quality of Russian governance and economic policies. The most likely
outcome is a Russia that remains internally weak and institutionally linked to the international system
primarily through its permanent seat on the UN Security Council. In this view, whether Russia can
adjust to this diminished status in a manner that preserves rather than upsets regional stability is also
uncertain. The stakes for both Europe and the United States will be high, although neither will have the
ability to determine the outcome for Russia in 2015. Russian governance will be the critical factor.

Japan

The first uncertainty about Japan is whether it will carry out the structural reforms needed to resume
robust economic growth and to slow its decline relative to the rest of East Asia, particularly China. The
second uncertainty is whether Japan will alter its security policy to allow Tokyo to maintain a stronger
military and more reciprocal relationship with the United States. Experts agree that Japanese governance
will be the key driver in determining the outcomes.

India

Global trends conflict significantly in India. The size of its population—1.2 billion by 2015—and its
technologically driven economic growth virtually dictate that India will be a rising regional power. The
unevenness of its internal economic growth, with a growing gap between rich and poor, and serious
questions about the fractious nature of its politics, all cast doubt on how powerful India will be by 2015.
Whatever its degree of power, India's rising ambition will further strain its relations with China, as well
as complicate its ties with Russia, Japan, and the West—and continue its nuclear standoff with Pakistan.

Key Challenges to Governance: People Will Decide

Global Trends 2015 identifies governance as a major driver for the future and assumes that all trends

we cite will be influenced, for good or bad, by decisions of people. The inclusion of the United States as
a driver—both the US Government as well as US for-profit and nonprofit organizations—is based on the
general assumption that the actions of nonstate actors as well as governments will shape global

outcomes in the years ahead.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-12
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.html

An integrated trend analysis suggests at least four related conclusions:
National Priorities Will Matter

« To prosper in the global economy of 2015, governments will have to invest more in technology, in
public education, and in broader participation in government to include increasingly influential
nonstate actors. The extent to which governments around the world are doing these things today
gives some indication of where they will be in 2015.

US Responsibilities Will Cover the World, Old and New

e The United States and other developed countries will be challenged in 2015 to lead the fast-paced
technological revolution while, at the same time, maintaining military, diplomatic, and intelligence
capabilities to deal with traditional problems and threats from low-technology countries and groups.
The United States, as a global power, will have little choice but to engage leading actors and
confront problems on both sides of the widening economic and digital divides in the world of 2015,
when globalization's benefits will be far from global.

US Foreign Priorities Will be More Transnational

e International or multilateral arrangements increasingly will be called upon in 2015 to deal with
growing transnational problems from economic and financial volatility; to legal and illegal
migration; to competition for scarce natural resources such as water; to humanitarian, refugee, and
environmental crises; to terrorism, narcotrafficking, and weapons proliferation; and to both regional
conflicts and cyber threats. And when international cooperation—or international
governance—comes up short, the United States and other developed countries will have to broker
solutions among a wide array of international players—including governments at all levels,
multinational corporations, and nonprofit organizations.

National Governments Will be More Transparent

e To deal with a transnational agenda and an interconnected world in 2015, governments will have to
develop greater communication and collaboration between national security and domestic policy
agencies. Interagency cooperation will be essential to understanding transnational threats and to
developing interdisciplinary strategies to counter them. Consequence management of a biological
warfare (BW) attack, for example, would require close coordination among a host of US
Government agencies, foreign governments, US state and municipal governments, the military, the
medical community, and the media.

 

Discussion

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue About the Future With
Nongovernment Experts

The international system in 2015 will be shaped by seven global drivers and related trends: population;
natural resources and the environment; science and technology; the global economy and globalization;
national and international governance; the nature of conflict; and the role of the United States. These
trends will influence the capacities, priorities, and behavior of states and societies and thus substantially
define the international security environment.

Population Trends

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
12 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-13
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdrttp://www ..internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

 

The world in 2015 will be populated by some 7.2 billion people, up from 6.1 billion in the year 2000.
The rate of world population growth, however, will have diminished from 1.7 percent annually in 1985,
to 1.3 percent today, to approximately 1 percent in 2015.

Increased life expectancy and falling fertility rates will contribute to a shift toward an aging population
in high-income developed countries. Beyond that, demographic trends will sharply diverge. More than
95 percent of the increase in world population will be found in developing countries, nearly all in rapidly
expanding urban areas.

¢ India's population will grow from 900 million to more than 1.2 billion by 2015; Pakistan's probably
will swell from 140 million now to about 195 million.

¢ Some countries in Africa with high rates of AIDS will experience reduced population growth or
even declining populations despite relatively high birthrates. In South Africa, for example, the
population is projected to drop from 43.4 million in 2000 to 38.7 million in 2015.

Russia and many post-Communist countries of Eastern Europe will have declining populations. As a
result of high mortality and low birthrates, Russia's population may drop from its current 146 million to
as low as 130 to 135 million in 2015, while the neighboring states of Central Asia will experience
continued population growth. In Japan and West European countries such as Italy and Spain, populations
also will decline in the absence of dramatic increases in birthrates or immigration.

e North America, Australia, and New Zealand—the traditional magnets for migrants—will continue
to have the highest rates of population growth among the developed countries, with annual
population growth rates between 0.7 percent and 1.0 percent.

Global Population: 1950-2015

Divergent Aging Patterns

In developed countries and many of the more advanced developing countries, the declining ratio of
working people to retirees will strain social services, pensions, and health systems. Governments will
seek to mitigate the problem through such measures as delaying retirement, encouraging greater
participation in the work force by women, and relying on migrant workers. Dealing effectively with
declining dependency ratios is likely to require more extensive measures than most governments will be
prepared to undertake. The shift towards a greater proportion of older voters will change the political
dynamics in these countries in ways difficult to foresee.

At the same time, "youth bulges" will persist in some developing countries, notably in Sub-Saharan
Africa and a few countries in Latin America and the Middle East. A high proportion of young people
will be destabilizing, particularly when combined with high unemployment or communal tension.

Movement of People
Two major trends in the movement of people will characterize the next 15 years—urbanization and
cross-border migration—each of which poses both opportunities and challenges.

Growth in Mega-Cities

The ratio of urban to rural dwellers is steadily increasing. By 2015 more than half of the world's
population will be urban. The number of people living in mega-cities—those containing more than 10
million inhabitants—will double to more than 400 million.

¢ Urbanization will provide many countries the opportunity to tap the information revolution and
other technological advances.

e The explosive growth of cities in developing countries will test the capacity of governments to
stimulate the investment required to generate jobs and to provide the services, infrastructure, and

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-14
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html]

14 of 51

social supports necessary to sustain livable and stable environments.

Regional Population: 1950-2015

Divergent demographic trends, the globalization of labor markets, and political instability and conflict
will fuel a dramatic increase in the global movement of people through 2015. Legal and illegal migrants
now account for more than 15 percent of the population in more than 50 countries. These numbers will
grow substantially and will increase social and political tension and perhaps alter national identities even
as they contribute to demographic and economic dynamism.

States will face increasing difficulty in managing migration pressures and flows, which will number
several million people annually. Over the next 15 years, migrants will seek to move:

« To North America primarily from Latin America and East and South Asia.

e To Europe primarily from North Africa and the Middle East, South Asia, and the post-Communist
states of Eastern Europe and Eurasia.

« From the least to the most developed countries of Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, and
Sub-Saharan Africa.

Regional Population by Age Group: 2000 and 2015

For high-income receiving countries, migration will relieve labor shortages and otherwise ensure
continuing economic vitality. EU countries and Japan will need large numbers of new workers because
of aging populations and low birthrates. Immigration will complicate political and social integration:
some political parties will continue to mobilize popular sentiment against migrants, protesting the strain
on social services and the difficulties in assimilation. European countries and Japan will face difficult
dilemmas in seeking to reconcile protection of national borders and cultural identity with the need to:
address growing demographic and labor market imbalances.

For low-income receiving countries, mass migration resulting from civil conflict, natural disasters, or
economic crises will strain local infrastructures, upset ethnic balances, and spark ethnic conflict. Illegal
migration will become a more contentious issue between and among governments.

For low-income sending countries, mass migration will relieve pressures from unemployed and
underemployed workers and generate significant remittances. Migrants will function as ethnic lobbies on
behalf of sending-country interests, sometimes supporting armed conflicts in their home countries, as in
the cases of the Albanian, Kurdish, Tamil, Armenian, Eritrean, and Ethiopian diasporas. At the same
time, emigration increasingly will deprive low-income sending countries of their educated elites. An
estimated 1.5 million skilled expatriates from developing countries already are employed in high-income
countries. This brain drain from low-income to high-income countries is likely to intensify over the next
15 years.

Health

Disparities in health status between developed and developing countries—particularly the least
developed countries—will persist and widen. In developed countries, major inroads against a variety of
maladies will be achieved by 2015 as a result of generous health spending and major medical advances.
The revolution in biotechnology holds the promise of even more dramatic improvements in health status.
Noninfectious diseases will pose greater challenges to health in developed countries than will infectious
diseases. Progress against infectious diseases, nevertheless, will encounter some setbacks as a result of
growing microbial resistance to antibiotics and the accelerating pace of international movement of
people and products that facilitate the spread of infectious diseases.

Countries with Youth Bulges in 2000 and 2015

Developing countries, by contrast, are likely to experience a surge in both infectious and noninfectious

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-15
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expértsp://www .internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends201 5/index.html

diseases and in general will have inadequate health care capacities and spending.

e Tuberculosis, malaria, hepatitis, and particularly AIDS will continue to increase rapidly. AIDS and
TB together are likely to account for the majority of deaths in most developing countries.

AIDS Public Awareness Poster

AIDS will be a major problem not only in Africa but also in India, Southeast Asia, several countries
formerly part of the Soviet Union, and possibly China.

e AIDS will reduce economic growth by up to 1 percent of GDP per year and consume more than 50
percent of health budgets in the hardest-hit countries.

e AIDS and such associated diseases as TB will have a destructive impact on families and society. In
some African countries, average lifespans will be reduced by as much as 30 to 40 years, generating
more than 40 million orphans and contributing to poverty, crime, and instability.

e AIDS, other diseases, and health problems will hurt prospects for transition to democratic regimes
as they undermine civil society, hamper the evolution of sound political and economic institutions,
and intensify the struggle for power and resources.

Natural Resources and Environment

Food

Driven by advances in agricultural technologies, world food grain production and stocks in 2015 will be
adequate to meet the needs of a growing world population. Despite the overall adequacy of food,
problems of distribution and availability will remain.

e The number of chronically malnourished people in conflict-ridden Sub-Saharan Africa will increase
by more than 20 percent over the next 15 years.

e The potential for famine will still exist where the combination of repressive government or internal
conflict and persistent natural disasters prevents or limits relief efforts, as in Somalia in the early
1990s and North Korea more recently.

e Donors will become more reluctant to provide relief when the effort might become embroiled in
military conflict.

Global Grain Production: 1971-2015

The use of genetically modified crops has great potential for meeting the nutrition needs of the poor in
developing countries. Popular and political opposition in the EU countries and, to a lesser extent, in the
United States, however, has clouded the prospects for applying this technology.

Challenged Water Supply

Water
By 2015 nearly half the world's population—more than 3 billion people—will live in countries that are

"water-stressed"—have less than 1,700 cubic meters of water per capita per year—mostly in Africa, the
Middle East, South Asia, and northern China.

In the developing world, 80 percent of water usage goes into agriculture, a proportion that is not
sustainable; and in 2015 a number of developing countries will be unable to maintain their levels of
irrigated agriculture. Overpumping of groundwater in many of the world's important grain-growing
regions will be an increasing problem; about 1,000 tons of water are needed to produce a ton of grain.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
15 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-16
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm]

¢ The water table under some of the major grain-producing areas in northern China is falling at a rate
of five feet per year, and water tables throughout India are falling an average of 3-10 feet per year.

Developing Countries Challenged to Provide Infrastructure

Measures undertaken to increase water availability and to ease acute water shortages—using water more
efficiently, expanding use of desalinization, developing genetically modified crops that use less water or
more saline water, and importing water—will not be sufficient to substantially change the outlook for
water shortages in 2015. Many will be expensive; policies to price water more realistically are not likely
to be broadly implemented within the next 15 years, and subsidizing water is politically sensitive for the
many low-income countries short of water because their populations expect cheap water.

Water has been a source of contention historically, but no water dispute has been a cause of open
interstate conflict; indeed, water shortages often have stimulated cooperative arrangements for sharing
the scarce resource. But as countries press against the limits of available water between now and 2015,
the possibility of conflict will increase.

Nearly one-half of the world's land surface consists of river basins shared by more than one country, and
more than 30 nations receive more than one-third of their water from outside their borders.

e Turkey is building new dams and irrigation projects on the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, which will
affect water flows into Syria and Irag—two countries that will experience considerable population
growth.

¢ Egypt is proceeding with a major diversion of water from the Nile, which flows from Ethiopia and
Sudan, both of which will want to draw more water from the Nile for their own development by
2015. Water-sharing arrangements are likely to become more contentious.

Water shortages occurring in combination with other sources of tension—such as in.the Middle
East—will be the most worrisome.

World Water Availibility

Energy

The global economy will continue to become more energy efficient through 2015. Traditional industries,
as well as transportation, are increasingly efficient in their energy use. Moreover, the most dynamic
growth areas in the global economy, especially services and the knowledge fields, are less energy
intensive than the economic activities that they replace. Energy production also is becoming more
efficient. Technological applications, particularly in deep-water exploration and production, are opening
remote and hostile areas to petroleum production.

Sustained global economic growth, along with population increases, will drive a nearly 50 percent
increase in the demand for energy over the next 15 years. Total oil demand will increase from roughly
75 million barrels per day in 2000 to more than 100 million barrels in 2015, an increase almost as large
as OPEC's current production. Over the next 15 years, natural gas usage will increase more rapidly than
that of any other energy source—by more than 100 percent—mainly stemming from the tripling of gas
consumption in Asia.

Asia will drive the expansion in energy demand, replacing North America as the leading energy
consumption region and accounting for more than half of the world's total increase in demand.

¢ China, and to a lesser extent India, will see especially dramatic increases in energy consumption.

e By 2015, only one-tenth of Persian Gulf oil will be directed to Western markets; three-quarters will
go to Asia.

Fossil fuels will remain the dominant form of energy despite increasing concerns about global warming.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-17
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expédrttp://www .internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm]

17 of 51

 

Efficiency of solar cells will improve, genetic engineering will increase the long-term prospects for the
large-scale use of ethanol, and hydrates will be used increasingly as fuels. Nuclear energy use will
remain at current levels.

World Energy Consumption 1970 - 2015

Meeting the increase in demand for energy will pose neither a major supply challenge nor lead to
substantial price increases in real terms. Estimates of the world's total endowment of oil have steadily
increased as technological progress in extracting oil from remote sources has enabled new discoveries
and more efficient production. Recent estimates indicate that 80 percent of the world's available oil still
remains in the ground, as does 95 percent of the world's natural gas.

¢ The Persian Gulf region—absent a major war—will see large increases in oil production capacity
and will rise in its overall importance to the world energy market. Other areas of the
world—including Russia, coastal West Africa, and Greenland—will also increase their role in
global energy markets. Russia and the Middle East account for three-quarters of known gas
reserves.

e Latin America—principally Venezuela, Mexico, and Brazil—has more than 117 billion barrels of
proven oil reserves and potentially 114 billion barrels of undiscovered oil, according to the US
Geological Survey. With foreign participation, Latin American production could increase from 9
million barrels per day to more than 14 million.

e Caspian energy development is likely to be in high gear by 2015. New transport routes for Caspian
oil and gas exports that do not transit Russia will be operating.

Oil-producing countries will continue to exert leverage on the market to increase prices but are unlikely
to achieve stable high prices. Energy prices are likely to become more unstable in the next 15 years, as
periodic price hikes are followed by price collapses. :

By 2015, global energy markets will have coalesced into two quasi-hemispheric patterns. Asia's energy
needs will be met either through coal from the region or from oil and gas supplies from the Persian Gulf,
Central Asia, and Russia. Western Europe and the Western Hemisphere will draw on the Atlantic Basin
for their energy sources at world prices.

Environment

Contemporary environmental problems will persist and in many instances grow over the next 15 years.
With increasingly intensive land use, significant degradation of arable land will continue as will the loss
of tropical forests. Given the promising global economic outlook, greenhouse gas emissions will
increase substantially. The depletion of tropical forests and other species-rich habitats, such as wetlands
and coral reefs, will exacerbate the historically large losses of biological species now occurring.

e Environmental issues will become mainstream issues in several countries, particularly in the
developed world. The consensus on the need to deal with environmental issues will strengthen;
however, progress in dealing with them will be uneven.

The outlook to 2015 is mixed for such localized environmental problems as high concentrations of
ozone and noxious chemicals in the air and the pollution of rivers and lakes by industrial and agricultural
wastes.

e Developed countries will continue to manage these local environmental issues, and such issues are
unlikely to constitute a major constraint on economic growth or on improving health standards.

e The developing countries, however, will face intensified environmental problems as a result of
population growth, economic development, and rapid urbanization. An increasing number of cities
will face the serious air and water quality problems that already are troubling in such urban centers
as Mexico City, Sao Paulo, Lagos, and Beijing.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-18
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expéittp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

18 of 51

 

¢ Russia and Ukraine will struggle with problems stemming from decades of environmental neglect
and abuse, including widespread radioactive pollution from badly managed nuclear facilities. These
problems are unlikely to be adequately addressed. As these countries pursue economic growth, they
will devote insufficient resources to environmental remediation.

e Central and Eastern European countries face similar problems as a result of the legacy of
environmental neglect from the Communist era; nevertheless, driven by their desire to gain EU
membership, several will become more effective in addressing these problems and will upgrade
their environmental standards.

Some existing agreements, even when implemented, will not be able by 2015 to reverse the targeted
environmental damage they were designed to address. The Montreal Protocol is on track to restore the
stratospheric ozone layer over the next 50 years. Nevertheless, the seasonal Antarctic ozone hole will
expand for the next two decades—increasing the risk of skin cancer in countries like Australia,
Argentina, and Chile—because of the long lag time between emission reductions and atmospheric
effects. Important new agreements will be implemented, including, for example, a global treaty to
control the worldwide spread of such persistent organic chemicals as DDT and dioxins. Other
agreements, such as the Convention on Biodiversity, will fall short in meeting their objectives.

Over the next 15 years the pressures on the environment as a result of economic growth will decrease as
a result of less energy-intensive economic development and technological advances. For example,
increased use of fuel cells and hybrid engines is likely to reduce the rate of increase in the amount of
pollution produced, particularly in the transportation sector. Also, increases in the utilization of solar and
wind power, advances in the efficiency of energy use, and a shift toward less polluting fuels, such as
natural gas, will contribute to this trend.

Global warming will challenge the international community as indications of a warming climate—such
as meltbacks of polar ice, sea level rise, and increasing frequency of major storms—occur. The Kyoto
Protocol on Climate Change, which mandates emission-reduction targets for developed countries, is
unlikely to come into force soon or without substantial modification. Even in the absence of a formal
treaty, however, some incremental progress will be made in reducing the growth of greenhouse gas
emissions.

¢ Both India and China will actively explore less carbon-intensive development strategies, although
they will resist setting targets or timetables for carbon dioxide emission limits.

e A number of major firms operating internationally will take steps to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.

Science and Technology

The continuing diffusion of information technology and new applications in the biotechnology field will
be of particular global significance. Two major trends will continue:

e The integration of existing disciplines to form new ones. The integration of information
technology, biotechnology, materials sciences, and nanotechnology will generate a dramatic
increase in innovation. The effects will be profound on business and commerce, public health, and

safety.

e The lateral development of technology. Older established technologies will continue "sidewise"
development into new markets and applications, for example, developing innovative applications
for "old" computer chips.

The time between the discovery and the application of scientific advances will continue to shorten.
Developments in the laboratory will reach commercial production at ever faster rates, leading to

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-19
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdrttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

increased investments.

Information Technology (IT)

Over the next 15 years, a wide range of developments will lead to many new IT-enabled devices and
services. Rapid diffusion is likely because equipment costs will decrease at the same time that demand is
increasing. Local-to-global Internet access holds the prospect of universal wireless connectivity via
hand-held devices and large numbers of low-cost, low-altitude satellites. Satellite systems and services
will develop in ways that increase performance and reduce costs.

By 2015, information technology will make major inroads in rural as well as urban areas around the
globe. Moreover, information technology need not be widespread to produce important effects. The first
information technology "pioneers" in each society will be the local economic and political elites,
multiplying the initial impact.

¢ Some countries and populations, however, will fail to benefit much from the information
revolution.

e Among developing countries, India will remain in the forefront in developing information
technology, led by the growing class of high-tech workers and entrepreneurs.

e China will lead the developing world in utilizing information technology, with urban areas leading
the countryside. Beijing's capacity to control or shape the content of information, however, is likely
to be sharply reduced.

¢ Although most Russian urban-dwellers will adopt information technologies well before 2015, the
adoption of such technologies will be slow in the broader population.

¢ Latin America's Internet market will grow exponentially. Argentina, Mexico, and Brazil will accrue
the greatest benefits because of larger telecommunications companies, bigger markets, and more
international investment.

e In Sub-Saharan Africa, South Africa is best positioned to make relatively rapid progress in IT.

Societies with advanced communications generally will worry about threats to individual privacy.
Others will worry about the spread of "cultural contamination." Governments everywhere will be
simultaneously asked to foster the diffusion of IT while controlling its "harmful" effects.

Biotechnology

By 2015, the biotechnology revolution will be in full swing with major achievements in combating
disease, increasing food production, reducing pollution, and enhancing the quality of life. Many of these
developments, especially in the medical field, will remain costly through 2015 and will be available
mainly in the West and to wealthy segments of other societies. Some biotechnologies will continue to be
controversial for moral and religious reasons. Among the most significant developments by 2015 are:

e Genomic profiling—by decoding the genetic basis for pathology—will enable the medical
community to move beyond the description of diseases to more effective mechanisms for diagnosis
and treatment.

« Biomedical engineering, exploiting advances in biotechnology and "smart" materials, will produce
new surgical procedures and systems, including better organic and artificial replacement parts for
human beings, and the use of unspecialized human cells (stem cells) to augment or replace brain or
body functions and structures. It also will spur development of sensor and neural prosthetics such as
retinal implants for the eye, cochlear implants for the ear, or bypasses of spinal and other nerve
damage.

e Therapy and drug developments will cure some enduring diseases and counter trends in
antibiotic resistance. Deeper understanding of how particular diseases affect people with specific

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-20
ITS ee

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends201 5/index.html

genetic characteristics will facilitate the development and prescription of custom drugs.

¢ Genetic modification—despite continuing technological and cultural barriers—will improve the
engineering of organisms to increase food production and quality, broaden the scale of
bio-manufacturing, and provide cures for certain genetic diseases. Cloning will be used for such
applications as livestock production. Despite cultural and political concerns, the use of genetically
modified crops has great potential to dramatically improve the nutrition and health of many of the
world's poorest people.

¢ DNA identification will continue to improve law enforcement capabilities.

Other Technologies

Breakthroughs in materials technology will generate widely available products that are smart,
multifunctional, environmentally compatible, more survivable, and customizable. These products not
only will contribute to the growing information and biotechnology revolutions but also will benefit
manufacturing, logistics, and personal lifestyles. Materials with active capabilities will be used to
combine sensing and actuation in response to environmental conditions.

Discoveries in nanotechnology will lead to unprecedented understanding and control over the

fundamental building blocks of all physical things. Developments in this emerging field are likely to

change the way almost everything—from vaccines to computers to automobile tires to objects not yet

imagined—is designed and made. Self-assembled nanomaterials, such as semiconductor "quantum

dots," could by 2015 revolutionize chemical labeling and enable rapid processing for drug discovery,
- blood content analysis, genetic analysis, and other biological applications.

The Global Economy

The global economy is well-positioned to achieve a sustained period of dynamism through 2015. Global
economic growth will return to the high levels reached in the 1960s and early 1970s, the final years of
the post-World War II "long boom." Dynamism will be strongest among so-called "emerging
markets"—especially in the two Asian giants, China and India—but will be broadly based worldwide,
including in both industrialized and many developing countries. The rising tide of the global economy
will create many economic winners, but it will not lift all boats. The information revolution will make
the persistence of poverty more visible, and regional differences will remain large.

Dynamism and Growth
Five factors will combine to promote widespread economic dynamism and growth:

Political pressures for higher living standards. The growing global middle class—now 2 billion
strong—is creating a cycle of rising aspirations, with increased information flows and the spread of
democracy giving political clout to formerly disenfranchised citizens.

Improved macroeconomic policies. The widespread improvement in recent years in economic policy
and management sets the stage for future dynamism. Inflation rates have been dramatically lowered
across a wide range of economies. The abandonment of unsustainable fixed exchange rate regimes in
Asia and the creation of the European Monetary Union (EMU) will contribute to economic growth.

Rising trade and investment. International trade and investment flows will grow, spurring rapid
increases in world GDP. Opposition to further trade liberalization from special interest groups and some
governments will not erode the basic trend toward expansion of trade. International capital flows, which
have risen dramatically in the past decade, will remain plentiful, especially for emerging market
countries that increase their transparency.

Regional GDP: 1970-2015

Diffusion of information technology. The pervasive incorporation of information technologies will

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
20 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-21
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

21 of 51

 

continue to produce significant efficiency gains in the US economy. Similar gains will be
witnessed—albeit in varying degrees—in numerous other countries as the integration of these
technologies proceeds. But the absorption of IT and its benefits will not be automatic because many
countries will fail to meet the conditions needed for effective IT utilization—high educational levels,
adequate infrastructure, and appropriate regulatory policies.

Increasingly dynamic private sectors. Rapid expansion of the private sector in many emerging market
countries—along with deregulation and privatization in Europe and Japan—will spur economic growth
by generating competitive pressures to use resources more efficiently. The impact of improved
efficiencies will be multiplied as the information revolution enhances the ability of firms around the
world to learn "best practices" from the most successful enterprises. Indeed, the world may be on the
verge of a rapid convergence in market-based financial and business practices.

Unequal Growth Prospects and Distribution

The countries and regions most at risk of falling behind economically are those with endemic internal
and/or regional conflicts and those that fail to diversify their economies. The economies of most states in
Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East and some in Latin America will continue to suffer. A large
segment of the Eurasian landmass extending from Central Asia through the Caucasus to parts of
southeastern Europe faces dim economic prospects. Within countries, the gap in the standard of living
also will increase. Even in rapidly growing countries, large regions will be left behind.

World Trade as a Percentage of World GDP: 1990-2015

Emerging Asia will be the fastest growing region, led by breakout candidates China and India, whose
economies already comprise roughly one-sixth of global GDP. To the degree that China implements
reforms mandated by its entry into the World Trade Organization, its economy will become more
efficient, enabling rapid growth to continue. China's economic development, however, will be mainly in
the dynamic coastal provinces. Agricultural provinces in northern and western China will lag behind,
causing social tensions that Beijing will be challenged to manage. India's relatively strong educational
system, democracy, and English-language skills position it well to take advantage of gains related to
information technology. India nevertheless faces enormous challenges in spreading the benefits of
growth to hundreds of millions of impoverished, often illiterate citizens, particularly in the northern
States.

GDP by Countries and the EU: 2000 and 2015

In Europe and Japan, the picture is mixed. Western Europe is likely to narrow what has been a
growing economic performance gap with the United States, and Eastern European countries, eager for
EU membership, generally will adopt reform policies and grow apace. South-Eastern Europe will
improve economic prospects only gradually as it improves regional security. Although Japan's
economic performance in the next 15 years will be stronger than that of the 1990s, its relative
importance in the global economy will decrease. Economic prospects for Russia and Eurasia are not
promising.

Latin America will manage fairly rapid aggregate growth, but it will be spread unevenly across the
region. The market-oriented democracies in Mexico and the southern cone will lead the way. A new
generation of entrepreneurs will be inclined to favor additional market openings, but the benefits may
further distort income distribution, already the most inequitable in the world. Elsewhere, the Andean
region will struggle with a poorly educated labor force, unstable governance, and dependence upon
commodities such as oil, copper, and narcotics.

The Middle East and North Africa will be marked by increasing internal differentiation as some
countries respond more effectively to the challenges of globalization or to the uncertainties of closer
integration with the EU while others lag. In Sub-Saharan Africa, persistent conflicts and instability,
autocratic and corrupt governments, overdependence on commodities with declining real prices, low
levels of education, and widespread infectious diseases will combine to prevent most countries from
experiencing rapid economic growth.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-22
Economic Crises and Resilience

The global economy will be prone to periodic financial crises, but its capacity to correct itself will
remain strong. The rapid rebound from the global financial crisis of 1997-98, the limited impact of the
recent tripling of oil prices on global economic growth, and the successful management of the "Y2K"
problem are the most recent manifestations of resilience. Nonetheless, economic liberalization and
globalization entail risks and inevitably will create bumps in the road, some of them potentially highly
disruptive.

e Economic crises will recur. The trends toward free markets and deregulation will allow financial
markets to overshoot, increase the possibility for sudden reversal in sentiment, and expose
individual countries to broad swings in the global market. Any of these could trigger a financial
crisis.

¢ Turbulence in one economy will affect others. Increased trade links and the integration of global
financial markets will quickly transmit turmoil in one economy regionally and internationally, as
Russia's financial turmoil in 1998 affected Brazil.

¢ Disputes over international economic rules. The Asian financial crisis revealed differences
among countries regarding global financial architecture. As emerging market countries continue to
grow, they will seek a stronger voice in setting the terms of international economic governance. A
lack of consensus could at times make financial markets skittish and undermine growth.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-23
I  __——— OO ee
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

 

 

 

National and International Governance

The state will remain the single most important organizing unit of political, economic, and security
affairs through 2015 but will confront fundamental tests of effective governance. The first will be to
benefit from, while coping with, several facets of globalization. The second will be to deal with

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

23 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-24
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.html

24 of 51

 

 

increasingly vocal and organized publics.

e The elements of globalization—greater and freer flow of information, capital, goods, services,
people, and the diffusion of power to nonstate actors of all kinds—will challenge the authority of
virtually all governments. At the same time, globalization will create demands for increased
international cooperation on transnational issues.

e All states will confront popular demands for greater participation in politics and attention to civil
rights—pressures that will encourage greater democratization and transparency. Twenty-five years
ago less than a third of states were defined as democracies by Freedom House; today more than half
of states are considered democracies, albeit with varying combinations of electoral and civil or
political rights. The majority of states are likely to remain democracies in some sense over the next
15 years, but the number of new democracies that are likely to develop is uncertain.

Successful states will interact with nonstate actors to manage authority and share responsibility. Between
now and 2015, three important challenges for states will be:

e Managing relations with nonstate actors;
e Combating criminal networks; and
¢ Responding to emerging and dynamic religious and ethnic groups.

Nonstate Actors

States continually will be dealing with private-sector organizations—both for-profit and nonprofit. These
nonstate actors increasingly will gain resources and power over the next 15 years as a result of the
ongoing liberalization of global finance and trade, as well as the opportunities afforded by information
technology.

The For-profit Sector. The for-profit business sector will grow rapidly over the next 15 years,
spearheading legal and judicial reform and challenging governments to become more transparent and
predictable. At the same time, governments will be challenged to monitor and regulate business firms
through measures consistent with local standards of social welfare.

Multinational corporations—now numbering more than 50,000 with nearly one-half million
affiliates—have multiplied in recent years as governments have deregulated their economies, privatized
state-owned enterprises, and liberalized financial markets and trade. This trend will continue.

Medium-sized, mostly local firms will multiply in many countries, driven by the shift away from
Communism and other socialist models and the broadening of financial services and banking systems.
Micro-enterprises also will multiply, not only because of deregulation and liberalization, but also
because many states will have a declining capacity to stymie small-scale commercial activities. As
medium-sized and small businesses become more numerous, they will encourage, and then link into,
various global networks.

The Nonprofit Sector. Nonprofit networks with affiliates in more than one country will grow through
2015, having expanded more than 20-fold between 1964 and 1998. Within individual countries, the
nonprofit sector also will expand rapidly.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-25
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.htm!

 

 

 

Over the next 15 years international and national nonprofits will not only expand but change in
significant ways.

e Nonprofit organizations will have more resources to expand their activities and will become more
confident of their power and more confrontational. Nonprofits will move beyond delivering
services to the design and implementation of policies, whether as partners or competitors with
corporations and governments.

e Western preponderance will persist but at a declining level as economic growth in Asia and Latin
America produces additional resources for support of civil society. In addition, autocratic
governments and Islamic states or groups will increasingly support nonprofit groups sympathetic to
their interests.

e Nonprofit organizations will be expected to meet codes of conduct. Governments and
corporations—which are increasingly held to standards of transparency and accountability—will, in
turn, expect nonprofits to meet similar standards.

Criminal Organizations and Networks
Over the next 15 years, transnational criminal organizations will become increasingly adept at exploiting
the global diffusion of sophisticated information, financial, and transportation networks.

Criminal organizations and networks based in North America, Western Europe, China, Colombia, Israel,
Japan, Mexico, Nigeria, and Russia will expand the scale and scope of their activities. They will form
loose alliances with one another, with smaller criminal entrepreneurs, and with insurgent movements for
specific operations. They will corrupt leaders of unstable, economically fragile or failing states, insinuate
themselves into troubled banks and businesses, and cooperate with insurgent political movements to
control substantial geographic areas. Their income will come from narcotics trafficking; alien

smuggling; trafficking in women and children; smuggling toxic materials, hazardous wastes, illicit arms,
military technologies, and other contraband; financial fraud; and racketeering.

e The risk will increase that organized criminal groups will traffic in nuclear, biological, or chemical
weapons. The degree of risk depends on whether governments with WMD capabilities can or will
control such weapons and materials.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
25 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-26
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.htm]

 

 

 

Changing Communal Identities and Networks

Traditional communal groups—whether religious or ethnic-linguistic groups—will pose a range of
challenges for governance. Using opportunities afforded by globalization and the opening of civil
society, communal groups will be better positioned to mobilize coreligionists or ethnic kin to assert their
interests or defend against perceived economic or political discrimination. Ethnic diasporas and
coreligionists abroad also will be more able and willing to provide fraternal groups with political,
financial, and other support.

e By 2015, Christianity and Islam, the two largest religious groupings, will have grown significantly.
Both are widely dispersed in several continents, already use information technologies to "spread the
faith," and draw on adherents to fund numerous nonprofit groups and political causes. Activist
components of these and other religious groupings will emerge to contest such issues as genetic
manipulation, women's rights, and the income gap between rich and poor. A wider religious or
spiritual movement also may emerge, possibly linked to environmental values.

Criminal Networks and New Technologies

Estimates of the number of distinct ethnic-linguistic groups at the beginning of the twenty-first century
run from 2,000 to 5,000, ranging from small bands living in isolated areas to larger groups living in
ancestral homelands or in diasporas. Most of the world's 191 states are ethnically heterogeneous, and
many contain ethnic populations with co-ethnics in neighboring states. By 2015, ethnic heterogeneity
will increase in almost all states, as a result of international migration and divergent birthrates of migrant
and native populations.

Current World Illicit Trafficking
Worldwide Adherents of Selected Major World Religions, Mid-1998

Communal tensions, sometimes culminating in conflict, probably will increase through 2015. In addition
to some ongoing communal frictions that will persist, triggers of new tensions will include:

e Repression by the state. States with slow economic growth, and/or where executive power is
concentrated in an exclusionary political elite and the rule of law and civil or minority rights are
weak, will be inclined to discriminate against communal minorities. Such conditions will foment
ethnic tensions in Sub-Saharan Africa, Central and South Asia, and parts of the Middle East, often
in rapidly growing urban areas. Certain powerful states—such as Russia, China, Brazil, and
India—also are likely to repress politicized communal minorities.

e Religious, often fused with ethnic, grievances. Few Muslim states will grant full political and
cultural rights to religious minorities. At the same time, they will not remain indifferent to the

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
26 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-27
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérisp://www. internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.htm]

27 of 51

treatment of Muslim minorities elsewhere: in Russia, Indonesia, India/Kashmir, China, and the
Balkans. Other religious denominations also will support beleaguered coreligionists.

e Resistance to migration. Some relatively homogenous countries or sub-regions in Asia and
Europe will resist ethnically diverse migrants, creating tensions.

e Indigenous protest movements. Such movements will increase, facilitated by transnational
networks of indigenous rights activists and supported by well-funded international human rights
and environmental groups. Tensions will intensify in the area from Mexico through the Amazon
region; northeastern India; and the Malaysian-Indonesian archipelago.

Overall Impact on States

The developed democracies will be best positioned for good governance because they will tend to
empower legitimate nonstate actors in both the for-profit and nonprofit sectors; will favor institutions
and processes that accommodate divergent communal groups; will press for transparency in government
and the efficient delivery of public services; and will maintain institutions to regulate legitimate
for-profit and nonprofit organizations and control illegitimate criminal groups. Countries in Western
Europe, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan have the requisite agility and institutions to meet
the challenges. Countries in Eastern Europe as well as Turkey, South Korea, India, Chile, and Brazil,
among other developing countries, are moving in these directions, despite some continuing obstacles.

Some newly democratic states and modernizing authoritarian states will have leaders amenable to
technological change and access to substantial human and financial resources. They will encourage
business firms, nonprofits, and communal groups supportive of the government and discourage or
suppress those that are independent-minded or critical of government policies. They will have some
success in coping with the energy, ideas, and resources of nonstate actors. Several Asian countries, such
as Singapore, Taiwan, and perhaps China, as well as some states in the Middle East and Latin America
are likely to take this approach.

Other states in varying degrees will lack the resources and leadership to achieve effective governance.
Most autocratic states in the Middle East and Africa will not have the institutions or cultural orientation
to exploit the opportunities provided by nonstate actors—apart from certain forms of humanitarian
assistance. In many of these countries, nonstate actors will become more important than governments in
providing services, such as health clinics and schools. In the weakest of these countries, communal,
criminal, or terrorist groups will seek control of government institutions and/or territory.

Overall, the number of states—which has more than tripled since 1945 and has grown 20 percent since
1990—1is likely to increase at a slower rate through 2015. This growth will result from remaining cases
of decolonization and to communal tensions leading to state secession, most likely in Sub-Saharan
Africa, Central Asia, and Indonesia. In some cases, new states will inspire other secessionist movements,
destabilizing countries where minorities were not initially seeking secession.

At the same time, the very concept of "belonging" to a particular state probably will erode among a
growing number of people with continuing transnational ties to more than one country through
citizenship, residence or other associations.

International Cooperation

Globalization and technological change are raising widespread expectations that increased international
cooperation will help manage many transnational problems that states can no longer manage on their
own. Efforts to realize such expectations will increase, but concerns about national interests as well as
the costs and risks involved in some types of international activism will limit success.

Mechanisms of international cooperation—intended to facilitate bargaining, elucidate common interests
and resolve differences among states—have increased rapidly in recent decades.

e International treaties registered with the United Nations more than tripled between 1970 and 1997.
In addition, there are growing numbers of agreements on standards and practices initiated by

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-28
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdittp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

self-selected private networks.

e The number of international institutions increased by two-thirds from 1985 until 1999, while at the
same time becoming more complex, more interrelated with often overlapping areas of
responsibility, and more closely linked to transnational networks and private groups.

International cooperation will continue to increase through 2015, particularly when large economic
stakes have mobilized the for-profit sector, and/or when there is intense interest from nonprofit groups
and networks.

Most high-income democratic states will participate in multiple international institutions and seek
cooperation on a wide range of issues to protect their interests and to promote their influence. Members
of the European Union will tackle the most ambitious agenda, including significant political and security
cooperation.

Strongly nationalistic and/or autocratic states will play selective roles in inter-governmental
organizations: working within them to protect and project their interests, while working against
initiatives that they view as threatening to their domestic power structures and national sovereignty.
They will also work against those international institutions viewed as creatures of the established great
powers and thus rigged against them—such as the IMF and the WTO—as well as those that cede a
major role to nonstate actors.

Low-income developing countries will participate actively in international organizations and
arrangements to assert their sovereignty, garner resources for social and economic development, and
gain support for the incumbent government. The most unstable of these states will participate in
international organizations and arrangements primarily to maintain international recognition for the
regime.

 

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

28 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-29
29 of 51

 

 

 

 

Future Conflict

Through 2015, internal conflicts will pose the most frequent threat to stability around the world.
Interstate wars, though less frequent, will grow in lethality due to the availability of more destructive
technologies. The international community will have to deal with the military, political, and economic
dimensions of the rise of China and India and the continued decline of Russia.

Internal Conflicts
Many internal conflicts, particularly those arising from communal disputes, will continue to be vicious,
long-lasting and difficult to terminate—leaving bitter legacies in their wake.

¢ They frequently will spawn internal displacements, refugee flows, humanitarian emergencies, and
other regionally destabilizing dislocations.

¢ Ifleft to fester, internal conflicts will trigger spillover into inter-state conflicts as neighboring states
move to exploit opportunities for gain or to limit the possibilities of damage to their national
interests.

¢ Weak states will spawn recurrent internal conflicts, threatening the stability of a globalizing
international system.

Internal conflicts stemming from state repression, religious and ethnic grievances, increasing migration
pressures, and/or indigenous protest movements will occur most frequently in Sub-Saharan A frica, the
Caucasus and Central Asia, and parts of south and southeast Asia, Central America and the Andean
region.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

: 001
DATE: FEB 2 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-30
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

30 of 51

 

The United Nations and several regional organizations will continue to be called upon to manage some
internal conflicts because major states—stressed by domestic concerns, perceived risk of failure, lack of
political will, or tight resources—will wish to minimize their direct involvement. When, however, some
Western governments, international and regional organizations, and civil-society groups press for
outside military intervention in certain internal conflicts, they will be opposed by such states as China,
India, Russia and many developing countries that will tend to view interventions as dangerous
precedents challenging state sovereignty.

Transnational Terrorism

States with poor governance; ethnic, cultural, or religious tensions; weak economies; and porous borders
will be prime breeding grounds for terrorism. In such states, domestic groups will challenge the
entrenched government, and transnational networks seeking safehavens.

Bombed US Embassy in Nairobi

At the same time, the trend away from state-supported political terrorism and toward more diverse,
free-wheeling, transnational networks—enabled by information technology—will continue. Some of the
states that actively sponsor terrorism or terrorist groups today may decrease or even cease their support
by 2015 as a result of regime changes, rapprochement with neighbors, or the conclusion that terrorism
has become counterproductive. But weak states also could drift toward cooperation with terrorists,
creating defacto new state supporters.

¢ Between now and 2015 terrorist tactics will become increasingly sophisticated and designed to
achieve mass casualties. We expect the trend toward greater lethality in terrorist attacks to continue.

Interstate Conflicts
Over the next 15 years, the international system will have to adjust to changing power relationships in
key regions:

¢ China's potential. Estimates of China beyond five years are fraught with unknowables. Some
projections indicate that Chinese power will rise because of the growth of its economic and military
capabilities. Other projections indicate that the array of political, social, and economic pressures
will increasingly challenge the stability and legitimacy of the regime. Most assessments today
argue that China will seek to avoid conflict in the region to promote stable economic growth and to
ensure internal stability. A strong China, others assert, would seek to adjust regional power
arrangements to its advantage, risking conflict with neighbors and some powers external to the
region. A weak China would increase prospects for criminality, narcotics trafficking, illegal
migration, WMD proliferation, and widespread social instability.

Russia's decline. By 2015, Russia will be challenged even more than today to adjust its
expectations for world leadership to the dramatically reduced resources it will have to play that
role. The quality of Russian governance is an open question as is whether the country will be able
to make the transition in a manner that preserves rather than upsets regional stability.

¢ Japan's uncertainty. In the view of many experts, Japan will have difficulty maintaining its
current position as the world's third largest economy by 2015. Tokyo has so far not shown a
willingness to carry through the painful economic reforms necessary to slow the erosion of its
leadership role in Asia. In the absence of an external shock, Japan is similarly unlikely to accelerate
changes in security policy.

¢ India's prospects. India will strengthen its role as a regional power, but many uncertainties about
the effects of global trends on its society cast doubt on how far India will go. India faces growing

extremes between wealth and poverty, a mixed picture on natural resources, and problems with
internal governance.

Current Ethnic Diversity States

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-31
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdiitp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

 

The changing dynamics of state power will combine with other factors to affect the risk of conflict in
various regions. Changing military capabilities will be prominent among the factors that determine the
risk of war. In South Asia, for example, that risk will remain fairly high over the next 15 years. India and
Pakistan are both prone to miscalculation. Both will continue to build up their nuclear and missile
forces.

India most likely will expand the size of its nuclear-capable force. Pakistan's nuclear and missile forces
also will continue to increase. Islamabad has publicly claimed that the number of nuclear weapons and
missiles it deploys will be based on "minimum" deterrence and will be independent of the size of India's
arsenal. A noticeable increase in the size of India's arsenal, however, would prompt Pakistan to further
increase the size of its own arsenal.

Russia will be unable to maintain conventional forces that are both sizable and modern or to project
significant military power with conventional means. The Russian military will increasingly rely on its
shrinking strategic and theater nuclear arsenals to deter or, if deterrence fails, to counter large-scale
conventional assaults on Russian territory.

¢ Moscow will maintain as many strategic missiles and associated nuclear warheads as it believes it
can afford but well short of START I or II limitations. The total Russian force by 2015, including
air launched cruise missiles, probably will be below 2,500 warheads.

As Russia struggles with the constraints on its ambitions, it will invest scarce resources in selected and
secretive military technology programs, especially WMD, hoping to counter Western conventional and
strategic superiority in areas such as ballistic missile defense.

China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) will remain the world's largest military, but the majority of the
force will not be fully modernized by 2015. China could close the technological gap with the West in
one or more major weapons systems. China's capability for regional military operations is likely to
improve significantly by 2015.

¢ China will be exploiting advanced weapons and production technologies acquired from
abroad—Russia, Israel, Europe, J apan, and the United States—that will enable it to integrate naval
and air capabilities against Taiwan and potential adversaries in the South China Sea.

¢ In the event of a peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue, some of China's military objectives—such
as protecting the sea lanes for Persian Gulf oil—could become more congruent with those of the
United States. Nevertheless, as an emerging regional power, China would continue to expand its
influence without regard to US interests.

¢ China by 2015 will have deployed tens to several tens of missiles with nuclear warheads targeted
against the United States, mostly more survivable land- and sea-based mobile missiles. It also will
have hundreds of shorter-range ballistic and cruise missiles for use in regional conflicts. Some of
these shorter-range missiles will have nuclear warheads; most will be armed with conventional
warheads. .

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-32
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdittp://www .internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

32 of 51

 

 

 

 

 

Japan has a small but modern military force, more able than any other in Asia to integrate large
quantities of new weaponry. Japan's future military strength will reflect the state of its economy and the
health of its security relationship with the United States. Tokyo will increasingly pursue greater
autonomy in security matters and develop security enhancements, such as defense improvements and
more active diplomacy, to supplement the US alliance.

A unified Korea with a significant US military presence may become a regional military power. For the
next 10 to 15 years, however, knowledgeable observers suggest that the process of unification will
consume South Korea'senergies and resources.

Absent unification, North Korea's WMD capabilities will continue to cloud regional stability.
P'yongyang probably has one, possibly two, nuclear weapons. It has developed medium-range missiles
for years and has tested a three-stage space launch vehicle.

P'yonyang may improve the accuracy, range, and payload capabilities of its Taepo Dong-2 ICBM,
deploy variants, or develop more capable systems. North Korea could have a few to several Taepo
Dong-2 type missiles deployed by 2005.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001

1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-33
OO <$§$§$§$§§"Y"Y"Y" ee

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expéritp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm!

In the Middle East, the confluence of domestic economic pressures and regional rivalries is likely to
further the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. By contrast,
spending on conventional arms probably will remain stable or decline in most countries. Some
governments may maintain large armed forces to absorb otherwise unemployable youths, but such
armies will be less well trained and equipped. Rather than conventional war, the region is likely to
experience more terrorism, insurgencies, and humanitarian emergencies arising from internal disparities
or disputes over ethnic or religious identity.

+ Iran sees its short- and medium-range missiles as deterrents, as force-multiplying weapons of war,
primarily with conventional warheads, and as options for delivering biological, chemical, and
eventually nuclear weapons. Iran could test an IRBM or land-attack cruise missile by 2004 and
perhaps even an ICBM or space launch vehicle as early as 2001.

+ Iraq's ability to obtain WMD will be influenced, in part, by the degree to which the UN Security
Council can impede development or procurement over the next 15 years. Under some scenarios,
Iraq could test an ICBM capable of delivering nuclear-sized payloads to the United States before
2015; foreign assistance would affect the capabilities of the missile and the time it became
available. Iraq could also develop a nuclear weapon during this period.

Reacting to US Military Superiority

Experts agree that the United States, with its decisive edge in both information and weapons technology,
will remain the dominant military power during the next 15 years. Further bolstering the strong position
of the United States are its unparalleled economic power, its university system, and its investment in
research and development—half of the total spent annually by the advanced industrial world. Many
potential adversaries, as reflected in doctrinal writings and Statements, see US military concepts,
together with technology, as giving the United States the ability to expand its lead in conventional
warfighting capabilities.

This perception among present and potential adversaries will continue to generate the pursuit of
asymmetric capabilities against US forces and interests abroad as well as the territory of the United
States. US opponents—state and such nonstate actors as drug lords, terrorists, and foreign
insurgents—will not want to engage the US military on its terms. They will choose instead political and
military strategies designed to dissuade the United States from using force, or, if the United States does
use force, to exhaust American will, circumvent or minimize US strengths, and exploit perceived US
weaknesses. Asymmetric challenges can arise across the spectrum of conflict that will confront US
forces in a theater of operations or on US soil.

 

 

 

It is also generally recognized that the United States and other developed countries will continue to
possess the political, economic, military, and technological advantages—including through National
Missile and Theater Missile Defense systems—to reduce the gains of adversaries from lateral or
"side-wise" technological improvements to their capabilities.

Threats to Critical Infrastructure. Some potential adversaries will seek ways to threaten the US
homeland. The US national infrastructure—communications, transportation, financial transactions,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
33 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-34
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.htm!

energy networks—is vulnerable to disruption by physical and electronic attack because of its
interdependent nature and by cyber attacks because of their dependence on computer networks. Foreign
governments and groups will seek to exploit such vulnerabilities using conventional munitions,
information operations, and even WMD. Over time, such attacks increasingly are likely to be delivered
by computer networks rather than by conventional munitions, as the affinity for cyber attacks and the
skill of US adversaries in employing them evolve. Cyber attacks will provide both state and nonstate
adversaries new options for action against the United States beyond mere words but short of physical
attack——strategic options that include selection of either nonlethal or lethal damage and the prospect of
anonymity.

Information Operations. In addition to threatening the US national infrastructure, adversaries will seek
to attack US military capabilities through electronic warfare, psychological operations, denial and
deception, and the use of new technologies such as directed energy weapons or electromagnetic pulse
weapons. The primary purpose would be to deny US forces information superiority, to prevent US
weapons from working, and to undermine US domestic support for US actions. Adversaries also are
likely to use cyber attacks to complicate US power projection in an era of decreasing permanent US
military presence abroad by seeking to disrupt military networks during deployment operations—when
they are most stressed. Many countries have programs to develop such technologies; few have the
foresight or capability to fully integrate these various tools into a comprehensive attack. But they could
develop such capabilities over the next decade and beyond.

Terrorism. Much of the terrorism noted earlier will be directed at the United States and its overseas
interests. Most anti-US terrorism will be based on perceived ethnic, religious or cultural grievances.
Terrorist groups will continue to find ways to attack US military and diplomatic facilities abroad. Such
attacks are likely to expand increasingly to include US companies and American citizens. Middle East
and Southwest Asian-based terrorists are the most likely to threaten the United States.

Weapons of Mass Destruction. WMD programs reflect the motivations and intentions of the
governments that produce them and, therefore, can be altered by the change of a regime or by a regime's
change of view. Linear projections of WMD are intended to assess what the picture will look like if
changes in motivations and intentions do not occur.

Short- and medium-range ballistic missiles, particularly if armed with WMD, already pose a significant
threat overseas to US interests, military forces, and allies. By 2015, the United States, barring major
political changes in these countries, will face ICBM threats from North Korea, probably from Iran, and
possibly from Iraq, in addition to long-standing threats from Russia and China.

e Weapons development programs, in many cases fueled by foreign assistance, have led to new
capabilities—as illustrated by Iran's Shahab-3 launches in 1998 and 2000 and North Korea's Taepo
Dong-1 space launch attempt in August 1998. In addition, some countries that have been traditional
recipients of missile technologies have become exporters.

e Sales of ICBMs or space launch vehicles, which have inherent ICBM capabilities, could further
increase the number of countries that will be able to threaten the United States with a missile strike.

The probability that a missile armed with WMD would be used against US forces or interests is higher
today than during most of the Cold War and will continue to grow. The emerging missile threats will be
mounted by countries possessing considerably fewer missiles with far less accuracy, yield, survivability,
reliability, and range-payload capability than the strategic forces of the Soviet Union. North Korea's
space launch attempt in 1998 demonstrated that P'yongyang is seeking a long-range missile capability
that could be used against US forces and interests abroad and against US territory itself. Moreover, many
of the countries developing longer-range missiles assess that the mere threat of their use would

complicate US crisis decisionmaking and potentially would deter Washington from pursuing certain
objectives.

Other means to deliver WMD against the United States will emerge, some cheaper and more reliable and
accurate than early-generation ICBMs. The likelihood of an attack by these means is greater than that of

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
34 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-35
ERE = =—=CO ll re

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www .internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm!

a WMD attack with an ICBM. The goal of the adversary would be to move the weapon within striking
distance by using short- and medium-range missiles deployed on surface ships or covert missions using
military special operations forces or state intelligence services. Non-missile delivery means, however, do
not provide the same prestige, deterrence, and coercive diplomacy associated with ICBMs.

 

 

Chemical and biological threats to the United States will become more widespread; such capabilities are
easier to develop, hide, and deploy than nuclear weapons. Some terrorists or insurgents will attempt to
use such weapons against US interests—against the United States itself, its forces or facilities overseas,
or its allies. Moreover, the United States would be affected by the use of such weapons anywhere in the
world because Washington would be called on to help contain the damage and to provide scientific
expertise and economic assistance to deal with the effects. Such weapons could be delivered through a
variety of means, including missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles, or covertly via land, air, and sea.

 

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

35 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-36
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

36 of 51

 

 

 

 

 

Theater-range ballistic and cruise missile proliferation will continue. Most proliferation will involve
systems a generation or two behind state of the art, but they will be substantially new capabilities for the
states that acquire them. Such missiles will be capable of delivering WMD or conventional payloads
inter-regionally against fixed targets. Major air and sea ports, logistics bases and facilities, troop
concentrations, and fixed communications nodes increasingly will be at risk.

e Land-attack cruise missiles probably will be more accurate than ballistic missiles.

Access to Space. US competitors and adversaries realize the degree to which access to space is critical
to US military power, and by 2015 they will have made strides in countering US space dominance.
International commercialization of space will give states and nonstate adversaries access rivaling today's
major space powers in such areas as high-resolution reconnaissance and weather prediction, global
encrypted communications, and precise navigation. When combined, such services will provide
adversaries who are aware of US and allied force deployments the capability for precise targeting and
global coordination of operations. Moreover, many adversaries will have developed capabilities to
degrade US space assets—in particular, with attacks against ground facilities, electronic warfare, and

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-37
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expditsp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

37 of 51

denial and deception. By 2015, several countries will have such counterspace technologies as improved
space-object tracking, signal jamming, and directed-energy weapons such as low-power lasers.

 

 

 

 

Major Regions

The following snapshots of individual regions result from our assessment of trends and from estimates
by regional experts as to where specific nations will be in 15 years. To make these judgments, we have
distilled the views expressed by many outside experts in our conferences and workshops. The results are

intended to stimulate debate, not to endorse one view over another.

Political Rights in East and Southeast Asia

East and Southeast Asia
Regional Trends. East Asia over the next 15 years will be characterized by uneven economic

dynamism—both between and within states—political and national assertiveness rather than ideology,
and potential for strategic tension if not outright conflict.

The states of the region will be led by generally nationalistic governments eschewing ideology and

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-38
Globa! Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

38 of 51

 

focusing on nation-building and development. These states will broadly accommodate international
norms on the free flow of information to modernize their economies, open markets, and fight
international crime and disease. They also will encounter pressure for greater political pluralism,
democracy, and respect for human rights. Failure to meet popular expectations probably will result in
leaders being voted out of office in democratic states or in widespread demonstrations and violence
leading to regime collapse in authoritarian states.

Political and Security Trends. The major power realignments and the more fluid post-Cold War
security environment in the region will raise serious questions about how regional leaders will handle
nascent great-power rivalries (the US-China, China-Japan, China-India), related regional "hot spots"
(Taiwan, Korea, South China Sea), the future of challenged political regimes (Indonesia, North Korea
absent unification, China), and communal tensions and minority issues (in China, Indonesia, the
Philippines, and Malaysia). On balance, the number and range of rivalries and potential flashpoints
suggest a better-than-even chance that episodes of military confrontation and conflict will erupt over the
next 15 years.

The implications of the rise of China as an economic and increasingly capable regional military
power—even as the influence of Communism and authoritarianism weakens—pose the greatest
uncertainty in the area. Adding to uncertainty are the prospects for—and implications of—Korean
unification over the next 15 years, and the evolution of Japan's regional leadership aspirations and
capabilities.

Instability in Russia and Central Asia, and the nuclear standoff between India and Pakistan will be
peripheral] but still important in East Asian security calculations. The Middle East will become
increasingly important as a primary source of energy.

Economic Dynamism. While governments in the region generally will accept the need to accommodate
international norms on ownership, markets, trade, and investment, they will seek to block or slow the
perceived adverse economic, political, and social consequences of globalization.

The most likely economic outlook will be that rich societies—Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan,
Singapore, and pockets in China and elsewhere—will get richer, with Japan likely to continue to be a
leader in S&T development and applications for commercial use. In contrast, the poor
societies—Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, and rural areas in western China and elsewhere—will fall further
behind. Greater economic links are likely to have been forged between Taiwan, Hong Kong, and South
China as a result of the development of investment and infrastructure. China will be increasingly
integrated into the world economy through foreign direct investiment, trade, and international capital
markets. Energy markets will have drawn the region more closely together despite lingering issues of
ownership of resources and territorial disputes.

Key uncertainties will persist on economic performance and political stability, including the rising costs
of pensions and services for Japan's aging population; the adequacy of energy and water for China,
political leadership in Indonesia and China, and the impact of AIDS in Cambodia, Thailand, and
Vietnam.

Regional Interaction. Given the weakness of regional political-security arrangements, the US political,
economic, and security presence will remain pronounced. At the same time, many countries in the region
will remain uncertain about US objectives, apprehensive of both US withdrawal and US unilateralism.
Key states, most significantly China and Japan, will continue "hedging," by using diplomacy, military
preparations and other means to ensure that their particular interests will be safeguarded, especially in
case the regional situation deteriorates.

Japan and others will seek to maintain a US presence, in part to counter China's influence. Economic and
other ties will bind Japan and China, but historical, territorial, and strategic differences will underline
continuing wariness between the two. China will want good economic ties to the United States but also
will nurture links to Russia and others to counter the possibility of US pressure against it and to weaken
US support for Taiwan and the US security posture in East Asia. US-China confrontations over Taiwan

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-39
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expéritp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

or over broader competing security interests are possible.

Although preserving the US alliance, Japanese leaders also will be less certain they can rely on the
United States to deal with some security contingencies. More confident of their ability to handle security
issues independently, they will pursue initiatives internally and overseas that are designed to safeguard
Japanese interests without direct reference to the US alliance.

South Asia

Regional Trends. The widening strategic and economic gaps between the two principal powers, India
and Pakistan—and the dynamic interplay between their mutual hostility and the instability in Central
Asia—will define the South Asia region in 2015.

e India will be the unrivaled regional power with a large military—including naval and nuclear
capabilities—and a dynamic and growing economy. The widening India-Pakistan
gap—destabilizing in its own right—will be accompanied by deep political, economic, and social
disparities within both states.

e Pakistan will be more fractious, isolated, and dependent on international financial assistance.

e Other South Asian states—Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Nepal—wiill be drawn closer to and more
dependent on India and its economy. Afghanistan will likely remain weak and a destabilizing force
in the region and the world.

Wary of China, India will look increasingly to the West, but its need for oil and desire to balance Arab
ties to Pakistan will lead to strengthened ties to Persian Gulf states as well.

Demographic Challenges. Although population growth rates in South Asia will decline, population still
will grow by nearly 30 percent by 2015. India's population alone will grow to more than 1.2 billion.
Pakistan's projected growth from 140 million to about 195 million in 2015 will put a major strain on an
economy already unable to meet the basic needs of the current population. The percentage of urban
dwellers will climb steadily from the current 25-30 percent of the population to between 40-50 percent,
leading to continued deterioration in the overall quality of urban life. Differential population growth
patterns will exacerbate inequalities in wealth. Ties between provincial and central governments
throughout the region will be strained.

Jammu and Kashmir: Ethnic Mix of a Disputed State

Resource and Environmental Challenges. Water will remain South Asia's most vital and most
contested natural resource. Continued population and economic growth and expansion of irrigated
agriculture over the next 15 years will increasingly stress water resources, and pollution of surface and
groundwater will be a serious challenge. In India, per capita water availability is likely to drop by 50-75
percent. Because many of the region's waterways are interstate, water could become a source of renewed
friction. Deforestation in India and Nepal will exacerbate pollution, flooding, and land degradation in
Bangladesh.

India in 2015. Indian democracy will remain strong, albeit more factionalized by the secular-Hindu
nationalist debate, growing differentials among regions and the increase in competitive party politics.
India's economy, long repressed by the heavy hand of regulation, is likely to achieve sustained growth to
the degree reforms are implemented. High-technology companies will be the most dynamic agents and
will lead the thriving service sector in four key urban centers—-Mumbai, New Delhi, Bangalore, and
Chennai. Computer software services and customized applications will continue to expand as India
strengthens economic ties to key international markets. Industries such as pharmaceuticals and
agro-processing also will compete globally. Numerous factors provide India a competitive advantage in
the global economy. It has the largest English-speaking population in the developing world; its
education system produces millions of scientific and technical personnel. India has a growing
business-minded middle class eager to strengthen ties to the outside world, and the large Indian
expatriate population provides strong links to key markets around the world.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-40
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

Despite rapid economic growth, more than half a billion Indians will remain in dire poverty. Harnessing
technology to improve agriculture will be India's main challenge in alleviating poverty in 2015. The
widening gulf between "have" and "have-not" regions and disagreements over the pace and nature of
reforms will be a source of domestic strife. Rapidly growing, poorer northern states will continue to
drain resources in subsidies and social welfare benefits.

Pakistan in 2015. Pakistan, our conferees concluded, will not recover easily from decades of political
and economic mismanagement, divisive politics, lawlessness, corruption and ethnic friction. Nascent
democratic reforms will produce little change in the face of opposition from an entrenched political elite
and radical Islamic parties. Further domestic decline would benefit Islamic political activists, who may
significantly increase their role in national politics and alter the makeup and cohesion of the
military—once Pakistan's most capable institution. In a climate of continuing domestic turmoil, the
central government's control probably will be reduced to the Punjabi heartland and the economic hub of
Karachi.

Other Regional States. Prospects for Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka in 2015 appear bleak.
Decades of foreign domination and civil war have devastated Afghanistan's society and economy, and
the country is likely to remain internationally isolated, a major narcotics exporter, and a haven for
Islamic radicals and terrorist groups. Bangladesh will not abandon democracy but will be characterized
by coalitions or weak one-party governments, fragile institutions of governance, deep-seated leadership
squabbles, and no notion of a loyal opposition.

Security and Political Concerns Predominate. The threat of major conflict between India and Pakistan
will overshadow all other regional issues during the next 15 years. Continued turmoil in Afghanistan and
Pakistan will spill over into Kashmir and other areas of the subcontinent, prompting Indian leaders to

take more aggressive preemptive and retaliatory actions. India's conventional military advantage over
Pakistan will widen as a result of New Delhi's superior economic position. India will also continue to

build up its ocean-going navy to dominate the Indian Ocean transit routes used for delivery of Persian '
Gulf oil to Asia. The decisive shift in conventional military power in India's favor over the coming years
potentially will make the region more volatile and unstable. Both India and Pakistan will see weapons of
mass destruction as a strategic imperative and will continue to amass nuclear warheads and build a

variety of missile delivery systems.

Projected Demographic Trends in Eurasia

Russia and Eurasia

Regional Trends. Uncertainties abound about the future internal configuration, geopolitical dynamics,
and degree of turbulence within and among former Soviet states. Russia and the other states of Eurasia
are likely to fall short in resolving critical impediments to economic and political reform in their struggle
to manage the negative legacies of the Soviet period. Changing demographics, chronic economic
difficulties, and continued questions about governance will constrain Russia's ability to project its power
beyond the former Soviet republics to the south, complicate Ukraine's efforts to draw closer to the West,
and retard the development of stable, open political structures throughout the Caucasus and Central Asia.
Those states that could make progress on the basis of potential energy revenues are likely to fail because
of corruption and the absence of structural economic reform. The rapid pace of scientific and
technological innovation, as well as globalization, will leave these states further behind the West as well
as behind the major emerging markets.

The economic challenges to these countries will remain daunting: insufficient structural reform, poor
productivity in agriculture as compared with Western standards, decaying infrastructure and
environmental degradation. Corruption and organized crime, sustained by drug trafficking, money
laundering, and other illegal enterprises and, in several instances, protected by corrupt political allies,
will persist.

Demographic pressures also will affect the economic performance and political cohesiveness of these
states. Because of low birthrates and falling life expectancy among males, the populations of the Slavic

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
40 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM

Bi a agg eS =. _ a are nd
Page-41
Globa! Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends20 1 5/index.html

core and much of the Caucasus will continue to decline; Russian experts predict that the country's
population could fall from 146 million at present to 130-135 million by 2015. At the other end of the
spectrum, the Central Asian countries will face a growing youth cohort that will peak around 2010
before resuming a more gradual pattern of population growth.

The centrality of Russia will continue to diminish, and by 2015 "Eurasia" will be a geographic term
lacking a unifying political, economic, and cultural reality. Russia and the western Eurasian States will
continue to orient themselves toward Europe but will remain essentially outside of it. Because of
geographic proximity and cultural affinities, the Caucasus will be closer politically to their neighbors to
the south and west, with Central Asia drawing closer to South Asia and China. Nonetheless, important
interdependencies will remain, primarily in the energy sphere.

Russia will remain the most important actor in the former Soviet Union. Its power relative to others in
the region and neighboring areas will have declined, however, and it will continue to lack the resources
to impose its will.

The Soviet economic inheritance will continue to plague Russia. Besides a crumbling physical
infrastructure, years of environmental neglect are taking a toll on the population, a toll made worse by
such societal costs of transition as alcoholism, cardiac diseases, drugs, and a worsening health delivery
system. Russia's population is not only getting smaller, but it is becoming less and less healthy and thus
less able to serve as an engine of economic recovery. In macro economic terms Russia's GDP probably
has bottomed out. Russia, nevertheless, is still likely to fall short in its efforts to become fully integrated
into the global financial and trading system by 2015. Even under a best case scenario of five percent
annual economic growth, Russia would attain an economy less than one-fifth the size of that of the
United States.

Many Russian futures are possible, ranging from political resurgence to dissolution. The general drift,
however, is toward authoritarianism, although not to the extreme extent of the Soviet period. The factors
favoring this course are President Putin's own bent toward hierarchical rule from Moscow; the «
population's general support of this course as an antidote to the messiness and societal disruption of the
post-Soviet transition; the ability of the ruling elite to hold on to power because of the lack of effective
national opposition, thus making that elite accountable only to itself; and the ongoing shift of tax
resources from the regions to the center. This centralizing tendency will contribute to dysfunctional
governance. Effective governance is nearly impossible under such centralization for a country as large
and diverse as Russia and lacking well-ordered, disciplined national bureaucracies. Recentralization,
however, will be constrained by the interconnectedness brought about by the global information
revolution, and by the gradual, although uneven, growth of civil society.

Russia will focus its foreign policy goals on reestablishing lost influence in the former Soviet republics
to the south, fostering ties to Europe and Asia, and presenting itself as a significant player vis-a-vis the
United States. Its energy resources will be an important lever for these endeavors. However, its domestic
ills will frustrate its efforts to reclaim its great power status. Russia will maintain the second largest
nuclear arsenal in the world as the last vestige of its old status. The net outcome of these trends will be a
Russia that remains internally weak and institutionally linked to the international system primarily
through its permanent seat on the UN Security Council.

Ukraine's path to the West will be constrained by widespread corruption, the power of criminal
organizations, and lingering questions over its commitment to the rule of law. Kiev will remain
vulnerable to Russian pressures, primarily because of its continued energy dependence, but Ukrainians
of all political stripes and likely to opt for independence rather than reintegration into Russia's sphere of
influence.

In 2015, the South Caucasus will remain in flux because of unresolved local conflicts, weak economic
fundamentals, and continued Russian meddling. Georgia probably will have achieved a measure of
political and economic stability, fueled in part by energy transit revenues, but it will remain the focus of
Russian attention in the region. Armenia will remain largely isolated and is likely to remain a
Russian—or possibly Iranian—client and, therefore, a regional wild card. Azerbaijan's success in

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
41 of 5] DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-42
- Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

developing its energy sector is unlikely to bring widespread prosperity: Baku will be a one-sector
economy with pervasive corruption at all levels of society.

In Central Asia, social, environmental, religious, and possibly ethnic strains will grow. Wasteful
water-intensive practices and pollution of ground water and arable land will lead to continued shortages
for agricultural and energy generation. The high birthrates of the 1980s and early 1990s will lead to
strains on education, healthcare, and social services. The region also is likely to be the scene of increased
competition among surrounding powers—Russia, China, India, Iran, and possibly Turkey—for control,
influence, and access to energy resources. Developments in Afghanistan and Pakistan will threaten
regional stability.

Growth in Population From 2000 to 2015

The Middle East and North Africa

Regimes in the region—from Morocco to Iran—will have to cope with demographic, economic and
societal pressures from within and globalization from without. No single ideology or philosophy will
unite any one state or group of states in response to these challenges, although popular resentment of
globalization as a Western intrusion will be widespread. Political Islam in various forms will be an
attractive alternative for millions of Muslims throughout the region, and some radical variants will
continue to be divisive social and political forces.

By 2015, Israel will have attained a cold peace with its neighbors, with only limited social, economic,
and cultural ties. There will be a Palestinian state, but Israeli-Palestinian tensions will persist and
occasionally erupt into crises. Old rivalries among core states—Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Iran—will
reemerge. International attention will shift anew to the Persian Gulf, an increasingly important source of
energy resources to fuel the global economy, and oil revenues anticipated for Iraq, Iran, and Saudi
Arabia in particular will provide strategic—and potentially destabilizing—options for those states. New
relationships between geographic regions could emerge between North Africa and Europe (on trade);
India, China and the Persian Gulf (on energy); and Israel, Turkey, and India (on economic, technical,

and in the case of Turkey, security considerations).

A key driver for the Middle East over the next 15 years will be demographic pressures, specifically how
to provide jobs, housing, public services, and subsidies for rapidly growing and increasingly urban
populations. By 2015, in much of the Middle East populations will be significantly larger, poorer, more
urban, and more disillusioned. In nearly all Middle Eastern countries, more than half the population is
now under 20 years of age. These populations will continue to have very large youth cohorts through
2015, with the labor force growing at an average rate of 3.1 percent per year. The problem of job
placement is compounded by weak educational systems producing a generation lacking the technical and
problem-solving skills required for economic growth.

Globalization. With the exception of Israel, Middle Eastern states will view globalization more as a
challenge than an opportunity. Although the Internet will remain confined to a small elite due to
relatively high cost, undeveloped infrastructures, and cultural obstacles, the information revolution and
other technological advances probably will have a net destabilizing effect on the Middle East by raising
expectations, increasing income disparities, and eroding the power of regimes to control information or
mold popular opinion. Attracting foreign direct investment will also be difficult: except for the energy
sector, investors will tend to shy away from these countries, discouraged by overbearing state sectors;
heavy, opaque, and arbitrary government regulation; underdeveloped financial sectors; inadequate
physical infrastructure; and the threat of political instability.

Political Change. Most Middle Eastern governments recognize the need for economic restructuring and
even a modicum of greater political participation, but they will proceed cautiously, fearful of
undermining their rule. As some governments or sectors embrace the new economy and civil society
while others cling to more traditional paradigms, inequities between and within states will grow.
Islamists could come to power in states that are beginning to become pluralist and in which entrenched
secular elites have lost their appeal.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
42 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-43
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm!

Sub-Saharan Africa

Regional Trends. The interplay of demographics and disease—as well as poor governance—will be the
major determinants of Africa's increasing international marginalization in 2015. Most African states will
miss out on the economic growth engendered elsewhere by globalization and by scientific and
technological advances. Only a few countries will do better, while a handful of states will have hardly
any relevance to the lives of their citizens. As Sub-Saharan Africa's multiple and interconnected
problems are compounded, ethnic and communal tensions will intensify, periodically escalating into
open conflict, often spreading across borders and sometimes spawning secessionist states.

Current HIV Prevalence Rates

 

In the absence of a major medical breakthrough, the relentless progression of AIDS and other diseases
will decimate the economically productive adult population, sharply accentuate the continent's youth
bulge, and generate a huge cohort of orphaned children. This condition will strain the ability of the
extended family system to cope and will contribute to higher levels of dissatisfaction, crime, and
political volatility.

Poverty and poor governance will further deplete natural resources and drive rapid urbanization. As
impoverished people flee unproductive rural areas, many cities will double in population by 2015, but
resources will be inadequate to provide the needed expansion of water systems, sewers, and health
facilities. Cities will be sources of crime and instability as ethnic and religious differences exacerbate the
competition for ever scarcer jobs and resources. The number of malnourished people will increase by
more than 20 percent and the potential for famine will persist where the combination of internal conflict
and recurring natural disasters prevents or limits relief efforts.

Economic Prospects. Conditions for economic development in Sub-Saharan Africa are limited by the
persistence of conflicts, poor political leadership and endemic corruption, and uncertain weather
conditions. Africa's most talented individuals will shun the public sector or be lured abroad by greater
income and security. Effective and conscientious leaders are unlikely to emerge from undemocratic and
corrupt societies.

¢ Most technological advances in the next 15 years—with the possible exception of genetically
modified crops—will not have substantial positive impact on the African economies.

¢ Although West Africa will play an increasing role in global energy markets, providing 25 percent
of North American oil imports in 2015, the pattern of oil wealth fostering corruption rather than
economic development will continue.

There will be exceptions to this bleak overall outlook. The quality of governance, rather than resource
endowments, will be the key determinant of development and differentiation among African states.

South Africa and Nigeria, the continent's largest economies, will remain the dominant powers in the
region through 2015. But their ability to function as economic locomotives and stabilizers in their
regions will be constrained by large unmet domestic demands for resources to stimulate employment,
growth, and social services, including dealing with AIDS. Even a robust South Africa will not exert a
strong pull on its partners in the Southern African Development Community (SADC). The success of the

South African economy will be more closely tied to its relationship with the larger global economy than
with Sub-Saharan Africa.

Ethnic, political, and religious conflicts

Role of Nonstate Actors. The atrophy of special relationships between European powers and their
former colonies in Africa will be virtually complete by 2015. F illing the void will be international
organizations and nonstate actors of all types: transnational religious institutions; international nonprofit

organizations, international crime syndicates and drug traffickers; foreign mercenaries; and international
terrorists seeking safehavens.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-44
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

¢ Fundamentalist movements, especially proselytizing Islamic groups, will plow fertile ground as
Africans seek alternative ways to meet their basic needs.

e Internal conflicts will attract—and leaders will in some cases welcome — foreign criminal
organizations or mercenaries to assist in the plundering of national assets, while faltering regimes
will willingly trade their sovereignty for cash.

International organizations will be heavily engaged in Sub-Saharan Africa over the next 15 years, given
its growing needs and slow growth relative to other regions. Africa will continue to receive more
development assistance per capita than other regions of the world.

¢ The international financial institutions will be a continuing presence in Africa, as many donor
countries funnel development assistance through them.

e The perpetuation of poor governance and communal conflicts in a region awash with guns will
generate frequent natural and man-made humanitarian crises, precipitating international
humanitarian relief efforts.

¢ The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the SADC will be the primary
economic and political instruments through which the continental powers, Nigeria and South
Africa, exert their leadership.

European Union Members and Aspirants

Europe

Regional Trends. Most of Europe in 2015 will be relatively peaceful and wealthy. Its residents will do
extensive business with the rest of the world but politically will be more inward-looking than the
citizens of Europe in 2000. Looking out to 2015, Europe's agenda will be to put in place the final
components of EU integration; to take advantage of globalization; to sustain:a strong IT and S&T base
to tackle changing demographics; and to wean the Balkans away from virulent nationalism.

EU enlargement, institutional reform, and a common foreign, security and defense policy will play out
over the next 15 years, so that by 2015 the final contours of the "European project" are likely to be
firmly set. Having absorbed at least 10 new members, the European Union will have achieved its
geographic and institutional limits.

« As a consequence of long delays in gaining EU entry (and the after-effects of actual membership),
leaders in some Central/Eastern Europe countries will be susceptible to pressures from
authoritarian, nationalist forces on both the left and right. These forces will capitalize on public
resentment about the effects of EU policy and globalization, including unemployment, foreign
ownership, and cultural penetration.

e The EU will not include Russia. The Europeans, nevertheless, will seek to engage
Moscow—encouraging stability and maintaining dialogue. Although Russia will continue to recede
in importance to the European governments, they will use US handling of Russia as a barometer of
how well or poorly Washington is exerting leadership and defending European interests.

Economic Reform & Globalization. EU governments will continue to seek a "third way" between state
control and unbridled capitalism: piecemeal and often unavowed economic reform driven in part by an
ever denser network of overseas business relationships and changes in corporate governance. Lingering
labor market rigidity and state regulation will hamper restructuring, retooling, and reinvestment
strategies. Europe will trail the United States in entrepreneurship and innovation as governments seek
ways to balance encouragement of these factors against social effects. Thus, Europe will not achieve
fully the dreams of parity with the United States as a shaper of the global economic system.

In Prague, Vienna, and other European capitals, protestors have questioned the merits of globalization.
By 2015, Europe will have globalized more extensively than some of its political rhetoric will suggest. It

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
44 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-45
IEEE IE IIIf ESSE

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

also will have less difficulty than other regions coping with rapid change because of high education and
technological levels. States will continue to push private sector competitiveness in the international
market. Three of the top five information technology centers in the world will be in Europe: London,
Munich, and Paris.

Many Europeans will see the role of foreign policy as protecting their social and cultural identities from
the "excesses" of globalization—and from its "superpatron," the United States. One of the ways in which
leaders will respond will be to clamor for greater political control over international financial and trade
institutions.

The aging of the population and low birthrates will be major challenges to European prosperity and
cohesion. Greater percentages of state budgets will have to be allocated to the aging, while, at the same
time, there will be significant, chronic shortages both of highly skilled workers in IT and other
professions and unskilled workers in basic services. Legal and illegal immigration will mitigate labor
shortages to a limited extent but at a cost in terms of social friction and crime. As EU governments
grapple with immigration policy and European and national identity, anti-immigrant sentiment will
figure more prominently in the political arena throughout Western Europe.

Turkey. The future direction of Turkey, both internally and geopolitically, will have a major impact on
the region, and on US and Western interests. Shifting political dynamics; debates over identity, ethnicity
and the role of religion in the state; and the further development of civil society will figure prominently
in Turkey's domestic agenda. The road to Turkish membership in the EU will be long and difficult, and
EU member states will evaluate Turkey's candidacy not only on the basis of economic performance, but
on how well it tackles this comprehensive agenda. Part of Turkey's success will hinge on the
effectiveness of a growing private sector in advancing Turkey's reform efforts and its goal of full
integration in the West. NATO's involvement in the Ballkans and expected enlargement in southern
Europe will increase ties between Turkey and the West.

& By dint of its history, location, and interests, Turkey will continue to pay attention to its neighbors to the
north—in the Caucasus and Central Asia—and to the south and east—Syria, Iraq and Iran. With few
exceptions, these states will continue to struggle with questions of governance. As Turkey crafts policies
toward the countries in these regions, no single issue will dominate its national security agenda. Rather,
Ankara will find itself having to cope with regional rivalries—including what policies to adopt toward
internal and interstate conflicts—proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the politics and
economics of energy transport, and water rights.

Europe and the World. Europe's agenda will require it to demonstrate influence in world affairs
commensurate with its size in population and economic strength. The EU's global reach will be based
primarily on economics: robust trade and investment links to the United States and growing ties to East
and Southeast Asia and Latin America.

In dealing with matters outside the region, European leaders will construe their global responsibilities as
building legal mechanisms, encouraging diplomatic contact, and—to a lesser extent—providing
nonmilitary aid. They will respond sporadically to foreign crises—either through the UN or in ad hoc
"coalitions of the willing" with Washington or others—but they will not make strong and consistent
overseas commitments, particularly in regard to sending troops.

Transatlantic Links. Economic issues will have overtaken security issues in importance by 2015, and
the United States will see its relations with Europe defined increasingly through the EU, not only on the
basis of trade but in the context of using economic tools—such as aid and preferential trading
regimes—to underwrite peace initiatives.

By 2015, NATO will have accepted many, but not all, Central/Eastern European countries. European
Security and Defense Policy will be set in terms of partnership with, rather than replacement of, NATO.

Canada —
Trends. Canada will be a full participant in the globalization process in 2015 and a leading player in the

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
45 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-46
EEE IEEE _ NO ODO
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdittp://www .internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm!

Americas after the United States, along with Mexico and Brazil. Ottawa will still be grappling with the
political, demographic, and cultural impact of heavy Asian immigration in the West as well as residual
nationalist sentiment in French-speaking Quebec. The vast and diverse country, however, will remain
stable amidst constant, dynamic change.

Ottawa will continue to emphasize the importance of education, and especially science and technology,
for the new economy. Canada also will promote policies designed to stem the flow of skilled workers
south and will seek to attract skilled immigrants—especially professionals from East and South Asia—to
ensure that Canada will be able to take full advantage of global opportunities. The question of Quebec's
place in the country will continue to stir national debate.

Canada’s status as the pre-eminent US economic partner will be even more pronounced in 2015.
National sensitivity to encroaching US culture will remain, even as the two economies become more
integrated. Ottawa will retain its interests in the stability and prosperity of East Asia because of growing
Canadian economic, cultural, and demographic links to the Pacific region. As additional trade links with
Latin America are developed through the North American Free Trade Agreement and a likely Free Trade
Area of the Americas, Canada increasingly will take advantage of developments in the Western
hemisphere. Although Canadians will focus more on Latin America and less on Europe, they will still
look to NATO as the cornerstone of Western security. Like Europeans, Canadians will judge US global
leadership in terms of the relationship with Russia, especially regarding strategic arms and National

Missile Defense (NMD).

Despite the relatively small size of Canada's armed forces, Ottawa still will seek to participate in global
and regional discussions on the future of international peacekeeping. Canada will continue to build on its
traditional support for international organizations by working to ensure a more effective UN and greater
respect for international treaties, norms, and regimes. Canadians will be sympathetic to calls for greater
political "management" of globalization to help mitigate adverse impacts on the environment and ensure
that globalization's benefits reach less advantaged regions and states.

Latin America: Average Annual Population Growth: 1998-2015

Latin America

Regional Trends. By 2015, many Latin American countries will enjoy greater prosperity as a result of
expanding hemispheric and global economic links, the information revolution, and lowered birthrates.
Progress in building democratic institutions will reinforce reform and promote prosperity by enhancing
investor confidence. Brazil and Mexico will be increasingly confident and capable actors that will seek a
greater voice in hemispheric affairs. But the region will remain vulnerable to financial crises because of
its dependence on external finance and the continuing role of single commodities in most economies.
The weakest countries in the region, especially in the Andean region, will fall further behind. Reversals
of democracy in some countries will be spurred by a failure to deal effectively with popular demands,
crime, corruption, drug trafficking, and insurgencies.

Latin America—especially Venezuela, Mexico, and Brazil—will become an increasingly important oil
producer by 2015 and an important component of the emerging Atlantic Basin energy system. Its proven
oil reserves are second only to those located in the Middle East.

Globalization Gains and Limits. Continued trade and investment liberalization and the expansion of
free trade agreements within and outside of Latin America will be a significant catalyst of growth.
Regional trade integration through organizations such as MERCOSUR and the likely conclusion of a
Free Trade Area of the Americas will both boost employment and provide the political context for
governments to sustain economic reforms even against opposing entrenched interest groups.

Latin America's Internet market is poised to grow exponentially, stimulating commerce, foreign
investment, new jobs, and corporate efficiency. Although Internet business opportunities will promote
the growth of firms throughout the region, Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico are likely to be the biggest
beneficiaries.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
46 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-47
EEE EEE EE OL ee
Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm]

Shifting Demographics. Latin America's demographics will shift markedly—to the distinct advantage
of some countries—helping to ease social strains and underpin higher economic growth. During the next
15 years, most countries will experience a substantial slowdown in the number of new jobseekers, which
will help reduce unemployment and boost wages. But not all countries will enjoy these shifts; Bolivia,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Paraguay will still face rapidly increasing populations in
need of work.

Democratization Progress and Setbacks. By 2015, key countries will have made some headway in
building sturdier and more capable democratic institutions. Democratic institutions in Mexico,
Argentina, Chile, and Brazil appear poised for continued incremental consolidation. In other countries,
crime, public corruption, the spread of poverty, and the failure of governments to redress worsening
income inequality will provide fertile ground for populist and authoritarian politicians. Soaring crime
rates will contribute to vigilantism and extrajudicial killings by the police. Burgeoning criminal

_ activity—including money laundering, alien smuggling, and narcotrafficking—could overwhelm some
Caribbean countries. Democratization in Cuba will depend upon how and when Fidel Castro passes from
the scene.

Growing Regional Gaps. By 2015, the gap between the more prosperous and democratic states of Latin
America and the others will widen. Countries that are unable or unwilling to undertake reforms will
experience slow growth at best. Several will struggle intermittently with serious domestic political and
economic problems such as crime, corruption, and dependence on single commodities such as oil.
Countries with high crime and widespread corruption will lack the political consensus to advance
economic reforms and will face lower growth prospects. Although poverty and inequality will remain
endemic throughout the region, high-fertility countries will face higher rates of poverty and
unemployment.

The Andean countries—Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Peru—are headed for greater challenges of
differing nature and origin. Competition for scarce resources, demographic pressures, and a lack of
employment opportunities probably will cause workers’ anger to mount and fuel more aggressive tactics
in the future. Fatigue with economic hardship and deep popular cynicism about political institutions,
particularly traditional parties, could lead to instability in Venezuela, Peru and Ecuador. Resolution of
the long-running guerrilla war is key to Colombia's future prospects. The Cuban economy under a
Castro Government will fall further behind most of the Latin American countries that embrace
globalization and adopt free market practices.

Rising Migration. Pressures for legal and illegal migration to the United States and regionally will rise
during the next 15 years. Demographic factors, political instability, personal insecurity, poverty, wage
differentials, the growth of alien-smuggling networks, and wider family ties will propel more Latin
American workers to enter the United States. El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua will
become even greater sources of illegal migrants. In Mexico, declining population growth and strong
economic prospects will gradually diminish pressures to seek work in the United States, but disparities
in living standards, US demand for labor, and family ties will remain strong pull factors. Significant
political instability during a transition process in Cuba could lead to mass migration.

¢ The growth of Central American and Mexican alien-smuggling networks will exacerbate problems
along the US border.

Illegal migration within the region will become a more contentious issue between Latin American
governments. Argentina and Venezuela already have millions of undocumented workers from
neighboring countries, and resentment of illegal workers could increase. Although most Haitian migrants
will head for the United States, Haiti's Caribbean neighbors will also experience further strains.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
47 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-48
nnn nnn CO OOO ee

Globa! Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expérttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

 

 

 

 

 

Appendix

Four Alternative Global Futures

In September-October 1999, the NIC initiated work on Global Trends 2015 by cosponsoring with
Department of State/INR and CIA's Global Futures Project two unclassified workshops on Alternative
Global Futures: 2000-2015. The workshops brought together several dozen government and
nongovernment specialists in a wide range of fields.

The first workshop identified major factors and events that would drive global change through 2015. It
focused on demography, natural resources, science and technology, the global economy, governance,
social/cultural identities, and conflict and identified main trends and regional variations. These analyses

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
48 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-49
ERE EEE OL ee

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdtttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html

became the basis for subsequent elaboration in Global Trends 2015.

The second workshop developed four alternative global futures in which these drivers would interact in
different ways through 2015. Each scenario was intended to construct a plausible, policy-relevant story
of how this future might evolve: highlighting key uncertainties, discontinuities, and unlikely or "wild
card" events, and identifying important policy and intelligence challenges.

Scenario One: Inclusive Globalization:

A virtuous circle develops among technology, economic growth, demographic factors, and effective
governance, which enables a majority of the world's people to benefit from globalization. Technological
development and diffusion—in some cases triggered by severe environmental or health crises—are
utilized to grapple effectively with some problems of the developing world. Robust global economic
growth—spurred by a strong policy consensus on economic liberalization—diffuses wealth widely and
mitigates many demographic and resource problems. Governance is effective at both the national and
international levels. In many countries, the state's role shrinks, as its functions are privatized or
performed by public-private partnerships, while global cooperation intensifies on many issues through a
variety of international arrangements. Conflict is minimal within and among states benefiting from
globalization. A minority of the world's people—in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, Central and
South Asia, and the Andean region—do not benefit from these positive changes, and internal conflicts
persist in and around those countries left behind.

Scenario Two: Pernicious Globalization

Global elites thrive, but the majority of the world's population fails to benefit from globalization.
Population growth and resource scarcities place heavy burdens on many developing countries, and
migration becomes a major source of interstate tension. Technologies not only fail to address the
problems of developing countries but also are exploited by negative and illicit networks and
incorporated into destabilizing weapons. The global economy splits into three: growth continues in
developed countries; many developing countries experience low or negative per capita growth, resulting
in a growing gap with the developed world; and the illicit economy grows dramatically. Governance
and political leadership are weak at both the national and international levels. Internal conflicts increase,
fueled by frustrated expectations, inequities, and heightened communal tensions; WMD proliferate and
are used in at least one internal conflict.

Scenario Three: Regional Competition

Regional identities sharpen in Europe, Asia, and the Americas, driven by growing political resistance in
Europe and East Asia to US global preponderance and US-driven globalization and each region's
increasing preoccupation with its own economic and political priorities. There is an uneven diffusion of
technologies, reflecting differing regional concepts of intellectual property and attitudes towards
biotechnology. Regional economic integration in trade and finance increases, resulting in both fairly
high levels of economic growth and rising regional competition. Both the state and institutions of
regional governance thrive in major developed and emerging market countries, as governments
recognize the need to resolve pressing regional problems and shift responsibilities from global to
regional institutions. Given the preoccupation of the three major regions with their own concerns,
countries outside these regions in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and Central and South Asia have
few places to turn for resources or political support. Military conflict among and within the three major
regions does not materialize, but internal conflicts increase in and around other countries left behind.

Scenario Four: Post-Polar World

US domestic preoccupation increases as the US economy slows, then stagnates. Economic and political
tensions with Europe grow, the US-European alliance deteriorates as the United States withdraws its
troops, and Europe turns inward, relying on its own regional institutions. At the same time, national
governance crises create instability in Latin America, particularly in Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, and
Panama, forcing the United States to concentrate on the region. Indonesia also faces internal crisis and
risks disintegration, prompting China to provide the bulk of an ad hoc peacekeeping force. Otherwise,
Asia is generally prosperous and stable, permitting the United States to focus elsewhere. Korea's
normalization and de facto unification proceed, China and Japan provide the bulk of external financial
support for Korean unification, and the United States begins withdrawing its troops from Korea and

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
49 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-50
NN _'_C T_T ee

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdtttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.htm!

Japan. Over time, these geostrategic shifts ignite longstanding national rivalries among the Asian
powers, triggering increased military preparations and hitherto dormant or covert WMD programs.
Regional and global institutions prove irrelevant to the evolving conflict situation in Asia, as China
issues an ultimatum to Japan to dismantle its nuclear program and Japan—invoking its bilateral treaty
with the US—calls for US reengagement in Asia under adverse circumstances at the brink of a major
war. Given the priorities of Asia, the Americas, and Europe, countries outside these regions are
marginalized, with virtually no sources of political or financial support.

Generalizations Across the Scenarios

The four scenarios can be grouped in two pairs: the first pair contrasting the "positive" and "negative"

effects of globalization; the second pair contrasting intensely competitive but not conflictual regionalism
and the descent into regional military conflict.

e In all but the first scenario, globalization does not create widespread global cooperation. Rather, in

the second scenario, globalization's negative effects promote extensive dislocation and conflict,
while in the third and fourth, they spur regionalism.

e In all four scenarios, countries negatively affected by population growth, resource scarcities and

bad governance, fail to benefit from globalization, are prone to internal conflicts, and risk state
failure.

¢ Inall four scenarios, the effectiveness of national, regional, and international governance and at
least moderate but steady economic growth are crucial.

e In all four scenarios, US global influence wanes.

Matrix: Drivers in the Global Futures Scenarios: 2000-2015

 

The National Intelligence Council

The National Intelligence Council (NIC) manages the Intelligence Community's estimative process,
incorporating the best available expertise inside and outside the government. It reports to the Director of
Central Intelligence in his capacity as head of the US Intelligence Community and speaks authoritatively
on substantive issues for the Community as a whole.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
50 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 1/22/01 8:29 AM
Page-51
EEE EE EE DEDEDE SSS 97 ee

Global Trends 2015: A Dialogue Abo... Future With Nongovernment Expdrttp://www.internet.cia/cia/publications/globaltrends2015/index.html!

Chairman John Gannon
(concurrently Assistant Director of

Central Intelligence for Analysis

and Production)

Vice Chairman Ellen Laipson

Director, Senior Review,

Production, and Analysis Stuart A. Cohen

National Intelligence Officers

Africa Robert Houdek
At-Large Stuart A. Cohen
Conventional Military Issues John Landry

East Asia . Robert Sutter
Economics & Global Issues David Gordon
Europe Barry F. Lowenkron
Latin America Fulton T. Armstrong
Near East and South Asia Paul Pillar

Russia and Eurasia George Kolt
Science & Technology Lawrence Gershwin
Strategic & Nuclear Programs Robert D Walpole
Warning Robert Vickers

 

[CIA Homepage] [What's New] [Publications Page]

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
51 of 51 DATE: FEB 2001 122/01 8:29 AM