
Page-1
“y

 

 

 

 

(bitty
(hi3)
mw)

      
  

SP Director of
4) Central

IT Ly Intelligence

National Intelligence Estimate

Global Humanitarian
Emergencies, 1993-94 (

This National Intelligence Estimate represents
the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the

US Intelligence Community.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: SEP 2001

 

Copy

go
Page-2
- Secre:
fo Director of NOPRN-NOCONTRACT

   

re
5 Central
OHS Intelligence

NIE 93-36

Global Humanitarian
Emergencies, 1993-94 (cx)

Prepared by Charles E. Allen, National Intelligence
Officer for Warniny,

Soret

October 1994
Page-3
|
|

 

 

 

Figure

Most Likely Critical Humanitarian Emergencies

Estimated number of persons in need (millions)

 

Present situation

compared to last year:
@ More critical
® Unchanged = 5

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

1992-93 1993-94 | Conditions Assumed @ Less critical
Present | Present
Cause Potential | Potential
Sub-Saharan Africa 20-3.0 2.0 | @| Conflict; poor security. TS
Angola Drought, conflict 30 No cease-fire; renewed attacks on food convoysiflights,
Liberia 10 1.0 | @] Unsteady cease-fire. : ~~
/ Conflict 17 Conflict stops; refugees return!
Mozambique 4.0 18 | @| Peace accords hold; some security problems.
Conflict, drought 30 Refugees return, or conflict resumes.
Rwanda 10 1.0 [@| Peace accords hold.
Conflict 1S Refugees return, or renewed fighting.
Somalia 2.0 1.3 | @| Sporadic violence, food security good.
Conflict, drought 2.0 Renewed clan warfare.
Sudan 3.0-5.0 2.0 | @| Intensified war in south.
Drought, conflict BAt Conflict worsens; local food supplies targeted.
Former Yugoslavia 13 28 | @| Continued conflict.
Bosnia-Herzegovina Conflict 20 Conflict stops; refugees return,
Central Eurasia 035 05 | @| Supply routes cut off.
Armenia Blockade 03 Situation improves if conflicts end in Georgia andfor clzerbuijan.
Azerbaijan 05 0.9 | @| Secessionist movements and leadership crisis persist.
Conflict is Goverument paralysis deepens, greater Armet
Georgia Ol 05 | @| Secessionist wars persist.
Conflict 10 Full-blown civil war. i
“Tajikistan 10 03 || Low-level clan/regional fighting continues
Conflict 10 Clan, regional warfare intensifies.
Middle East/North Africa | 0.75 1.2 | @| Baghdad sustains blockade.
Iraq (Kurds) Blockade by Baghdad | 1.2 Electricity cut off, harsh winter.
South Asia 45 5.0 | @| Fighting does not subside.
Afghanistan Conflict 55 ' More Tajiks cross border, or some Afghans repatriate if conflict lessens.

 

 

 

Sudan: Southem rebels—as well as the government—often

impede the flow of supplies.

1 conflict stops, the number of people in need of aid would

increase as refugecs return, but the situation would be less
critical becausg relief probably would flow more freely.

Confiden, FORN

Sgefet

 

   

a ; k i a
Bosnia: Relief convoys headed for opposing sides frequently
are blocked and turned back.

2
&
z
2

o

3ara42 10.93
Page-4
Se
N@PORN-NOCONTRACT

Key Judgments

 

Ethnic conflict and civil strife have increased humanitarian needs
around the world

The international relief system is under severe strain and faces
burgeoning demands in the future. Bureaucratic tangles and competi-
tion will remain the most common problems; the UN often has trouble
coordinating relief efforts even among its own agencies. “Donor
fatigue” will lead to more selective responses to disaster situations.
Other donor countries and UN agencies will look to the United States
for leadership.

Hostile environments are impeding relief efforts. In some areas of
conflict, only forceful—and costly—intervention will ensure that aid
reaches those in need

International operations are becoming more dangerous. Relief workers,
including those under the UN flag, increasingly will become targets of

violence am

Africa will continue to generate the most severe humanitarian crises
despite the end of the drought in the southern part of the continent.
More than 6 million refugees and three to four times that many
internally displaced persons will be at risk of hunger and disease.
Fighting in Angola and Sudan is creating conditions as severe as those
in Somalia last year. In Somalia itself, the recovery is precarious. im

If fighting continues in Bosnia as we expect, the population in need will
be double that of last winter, or reach some 2.8 million. Bosnians will
need about 390,000 metric tons of supplies to survive—the equivalent
of 19,500 C-130H flights—over the next six months. Even if fighting
stopped, the region would require about 270,000 metric tons.

Conflicts within the countries of the former Soviet Union have
intensified over the last year and will result in greater numbers of
people needing emergency aid. The most severe needs this winter will
be in Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Tajikistan.

 

NIE 93-36

October 1998
Page-5
Secret,

NOFO frBconrract

Ethnic warfare in Afghanistan and, to a lesser extent, in Sri Lanka will
cause millions to be displaced. The number of Kurds requiring relief in
northern Iraq has grown from 75C,200 to 1.2 million over the past year.
The 100,000 to 150,000 Shias in the southern marshes of Iraq could be

at risk of severe food shortages over the next few |

Emergency humanitarian needs in the East Asia—Pacific region are
declining for the second consecutive year. The political situation in
Cambodia remains tenuous, however, and intensified conflict would

produce additional humanitarian needs.
Page-6
Sec
N@EORN-NOCONTRACT

Scope Note

 

This Estimate identifies the ongoing and potential humanitarian crises
stemming from conflict worldwide for which the United States may be
asked to provide assistance over the next year. In addition, it addresses
the following questions:

¢ What will be the magnitude and scope of the crises? How many
people will be affected and what are their needs?

« What are the complications for delivery of aid? Is “donor fatigue” a
factor?

* Can the international infrastructure cope with burgeoning demands?

Included with this Estimate is a wall chart (in pocket at back)
containing specific environmental and operational data for each crisis
and a foldout locater map indicating the need, degree of severity, and

cause of potential or actual emergencies. Areas-most often affected by
natural disasters are identified in figure —
Page-7
Discussion!

 

Seer,
NOYOJN-NOCONTRACT

 

Unrelenting civil strife and ethnic warfare
around the world continue to place millions
of noncombatants at risk of death from
starvation and disease. Since last year’s Esti-
mate, critical humanitarian needs stemming
from conflict have increased.

Efforts to respond to humanitarian crises

have had mixed success. International inter-
vention in Somalia relieved the mass starva-
tion, and resourceful and determined efforts
in Iraq sustain the Kurds. In Bosnia, howev-
er, attempts to meet critical needs—while

saving thousands of lives—have fallen short.

Can the Relief System Cope?

The demands placed on the international
infrastructure for delivering emergency relief
over the past two years have uncovered
ominous faultlines. Lives continue to be
saved, but breakdowns in the system have
occurred. Even where food supplies are ade-
quate, bureaucratic tangles and coordination
problems, especially among UN agencies, as
well as local political and economic barriers,
impede the delivery of aid to people in
critical need. If not addressed, the effect of
these weaknesses, particularly those involv-
ing UN agencies, will erode donor confi-
dence and make donor countries more zeluc-

tant to participate.

' We define “critical humanitarian needs” as those arising from
acute emergency conditions—wars, conflict, natural or techno-
logical disasters—that are not met by routine relief programs
and mechanisms. We use the term “populations at risk” to
mean those in need of or dependent on international aid to
avoid deprivation leading to serious malnutrition or death. (U)

 

 

 

Sources of Information

The information used in this Estimate
comes from a variety of sources includ-
ing diplomatic, military, and press
reporting; data from UN agencies and
nongovernmental organizations; and
interviews with relief workers on the
scene. .

These reports frequently provide con-
flicting information: each organization
reports on situations as seen through
the filter of its own program, and crises
developing in isolated or denied areas
often have few observers. We believe
some reporters—political opponents,
rebel groups, governments, and relief
providers—at times exaggerate the
gravity of a situation. For example, at
one point last year, estimates on the
number of people at risk of starvation in

Sudan ranged from 200,000 to 10 mil-
ion in

Any specific numbers cited in this Esti-
mate, therefore, represent our best
assessment based on a review of all
available information, and we are confi-
dent that they accurately portray the
magnitude of the problen—if not the

absolutely precise numbers of the popu-
lation in nce
Page-8
The International Relief Network

A multitude of organizations—UN agen-
cies, international and national nongov-
ernmental organizations (NGOs), and
regional organizations—as well as donor
countries comprise the humanitarian
relief system. The UN bodies include the
UN Department of Humanitarian Assis-
tance (UNDHA)}, the UN High Commis-
sioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World
Food Program (WFP), the International
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the UN
Development Program (UNDP), the World
Health Organization (WHO), and the
Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO). Among the largest and most active
of the more than 16,000 NGOs are the
International Committee of the Red
Cross, various national Red Cross Societ-
ies, the International Rescue Committee,
Medecins Sans Frontieres, Equilibre,
OXFAM, and the International Save the

Children Alliance. Y |

Formal interaction between humanitarian
aid providers takes place in organizations
established for that purpose. The 86-
member International Council of Volun-
tary Agencies (ICVA) meets regularly with
UN relief agencies; its task forces provide
a focal point for NGO activities in disas-
ter-stricken countries. The Licross/Volags
Steering Committee, founded by the
League of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (LORCS) and several other
NGOs, submits humanitarian relief policy

 

to the UN and meets monthly to review
current disaster situations. The EC/NGO
Liaison Committee provides a dialogue
between about 600 European NGOs and
the EC. In addition, the Conference of
NGOs (CONGO) provides for NGO partic-
ipation in UN meetings and committees.

When disasters occur, UN agencies,
NGOs, and representatives of donor coun-
tries meet to plan relief efforts. They often
carry out needs assessments in combined
missions, although they also may do so
independent of each other, Likewise, they
may issue appeals as a consolidated group
or on an individual basis. International
conferences are held to elicit contributions
as well as to coordinate relief efforts. In
addition, a Special Representative of the
Secretary General and a UNDHA Special
Coordinator are sent to disaster areas; in
theory at least, the UNDHA Special
Coordinator organizes the relief opera-
tions. NGOs, the EC, and donor countries
also send coordinators. While all of these
representatives—as well as those from
aid-receiving countries—meet to discuss
their individual operations and to coordi-
nate their efforts, the number of meetings
and the level of successful coordination
appear to be specific to the country receiv-
ing aid and the organizations operating
there.
Page-9
Showing Its Warts...

The international relief system comprises
myriad independent or semi-independent
organizations that often work together but
sometimes do not. The UN’s agencies and
officials frequently compete for primacy, to
the detriment of aid delivery. In Angola, for
example, the personal representative of the
UN Secretary General, working with little
data, has tried to make crucial decisions that
run counter to the plans of the UN agencies
charged with delivering emergency aid.
Duplication of activities, bureaucratic bun-
gling, tensions between organizations, and
lack of coordination are commonplace. The
creation last year of the UN Department of
Humanitarian Affairs (UNDHA) was sup-
posed to alleviate these problems but instead
has compounded them. UNDHA often has
difficulty coordinating between its New
York office responsible for policy and its
operations headquarters in Geneva’

..» And Coming Under Fire

Hostile environments around the world
impede, and sometimes prevent, organiza-
tions from delivering sufficient assistance in
a timely fashion. Attacks on relief convoys,
theft of supplies, and murders of relief work-
ers all contribute to the impression that the
organizations cannot get the job done. Pri-
vate volunteers have long faced such dan-
gers, but attacks on UN forces and officials
during the past year have struck a blow
against the UN’s moral authority. The UN’s
experiences in Bosnia and Somalia will

’ encourage belligerents elsewhere to regard

relief workers under the UN flag as legiti-
mate targets of violence. (S NF)

  

 

 

Figure 2. Swedish UN troops secure relief
supplies at Sarajevo airport. (U}

More Challenges Ahead

As humanitarian needs grow, the task of
delivering emergency assistance is becoming
more dangerous and complex:

In areas of conflict, forceful and costly
intervention—requiring a range of logistic,
security, and combat forces—often is
required to ensure that food, shelter, and
medicines reach the populations at risk.

International forces will face additional
problems from infectious diseases and envi-
ronmental health risks, which represent a
greater threat than battle injuries to the
effectiveness of units conducting the relief

operations

Potential exposure to the AIDS virus pre-
sents another complexity. The militaries of
some countries with which US forces may be
working have HIV-infection rates in excess

- of 50 percent. Special planning will be

required in operations involving those forces,
especially in areas of conflict and in places
Page-10
Seeret

 

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) and Humanitarian Emergencies

AIDS is the final stage of a viral infection
of the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), which destroys the body's natural
immunity to fight infections, All HIV
infections are fatal. (u)

Refugees, peacekeeping or monitoring
Sorces, demobilizing militaries, and labor
migrants contribute to the spread of AIDS
beyond specific countries. Humanitarian
aid missions involving militaries with high
HIV-infection rates could spread viruses
to countries where it is not now a problem.
For example, Liberia’s relatively low
infection rate could be threatened by all
three countries—Uganda, Tanzania, and
Zimbabwe—considering joining an

expanded monitoring force there matin

UN regulations now require governments
to certify that their personnel are HIV-
negative before deploying them on UN-
sponsored missions. However, AIDS
screening is expensive, and some militar-
ies will shirk this costly procedure. Some

 

countries are already having difficulty
finding sufficient HIV-negative personnel
to meet multinational force commit-
ments—another disincentive to testing.

In addition, UN officials are not enforcing
their HIV regulation. Thus, the Ugandan
contingent soon to arrive in Somalia has
at least a 50-percent infection rate. The
commander of the UN force in Mozam-
bique has asked that the Zambian contin-
gent—many of whom he says have AIDS
and are causing operational and morale
problems—be replaced at the end of its
tour by troops from another country; how-
ever, he is skeptical that the UN will

honor his reques|.

The United States and other donor coun-
tries will have to take measures—includ-
ing leading and funding the international
oversight of HIV testing—to ensure the
safest possible environment for relief
personnel.

 

 

ci"ties are shared with part-

   

1Ons, expected to provide
medical services directly to locahpopytyions
that have high infection rates

“Donor Fatigue” Sets In...

The extent of critical humanitarian needs
and the problems of addressing them are

Socfet 4

affecting the international response. Over the
past year, donors generally have become
slower to respond, and contributions often
have fallen short. For example:

* Aid for Afghanistan lagged badly this
year; the UN Secretary General's Special
Representative reported in late June that
only about $36 million of a $138 million
appeal for the January to September period
had been pledged.
Page-11
Who Are the Donors?

The European Community provides sig-
nificant humanitarian aid in addition to
the aid provided by its members on an
individual basis. Other West European
and North American countries plus Japan
contribute most of the personnel, supplies,
and funds for humanitarian assistance,
either unilaterally or through UN organi-
zations and nongovernmental organiza-
tions. The share of funding varies with the
situation: developed nations had contrib-
uted over $950 million in disaster relief to
the former Yugoslavia as of June 1993;
the United States contributed some $354
million of the total. On the other hand,
the United States has contributed about
three-fourths of the funds for relief efforts

in Liberia. ||

What Do They Provide?

donors provide mobile hospital units,
shelter supplies, blankets, trucks, and

 

In addition to food, medicine, and funds, -

communications equipment. Russia and
Ukraine have specialized in supplying mil-
itary and civil transport and helicopters
ona contract basis at advantageous rates.
Russian aircraft have supported opera-
tions in Somalia and Cambodia; the
Ukrainians have flown hundreds of mis-
sions into Armenia

Stockpiles of emergency items are main-
tained by various governments and private
relief organizations around the world. For
example, Japan’s International Relief
Organization has storehouses in Japan,
Singapore, Mexico, and Italy for rapid
deployment to disaster sites. The UN
Department of Humanitarian Assistance

is promoting the worldwidg register of
such disaster stocks in

 

 

As of early August this year. the Interna-
tional Committee of the Red Cross’s
appeal for the former Soviet Union had
yielded less than half of the amount
requested.

* The UN so far this year has received

commitments of only $89 million of the
$226 million requested for Angola. |

... With Tough Choices in Store

The international relief system, already
under severe strain, faces burgeoning
demands in the future. The resources of the
United States and other donors will be

spread-more thinly, and donors will have to
be more selective about which crises to
address.

The decision of the international community
to respond to a specific humanitarian crisis
will depend on the accessibility of the popu-
laticn in need, the risks to relief personnel,
and severity of the crisis, as well as the level
of effort already being expended for other
critical needs. As in the past, some dire
situations in remote locations will be over-
looked by donors. Other crises will receive
widespread media attention that will

se
Page-12
*

 

 

World Grain Supply

Few countries have suffered serious crop
Sailures from droughts, floods, or other
natural disasters in 1993. In most coun-
tries requiring food relief, shortages have
resulted from political or economic tur-
moil that has disrupted iniports or distri-
bution within the country, particularly
distribution of food to persons displaced

by conic

Although global production of grains,
which provide human as well as animal
sustenance, will probaly decrease slight-
ly from the record levels of 1992, grain
production will still be above the average
Sor the past five years. Production of
wheat and rice—the main components of
the human diet in most countries—will
likely be higher than that of 1992 and
almost 3 percent above the recent average.

Most countries with large increases in
grain production had good rainfall this
year, and their governments have raised
crop prices and promoted irrigation to
boost production. For example, wheat
crops in most of the countries in a band
from Kazakhstan through the Middle

 

East to parts of North Africa benefited
from above-normal rainfall during 1993.
Moreover, several of these countries—
including Iran, Iraq, and Turkmenistan—
have vigorously promoted wheat produc-
tion to decrease their dependency on im-
ports. Despite their production increases,
several of these countries will still have
large deficits and will require imports or
food aid,

Agricultural experts expect the largest
proportional declines in food production
to occur in a diverse group of countries:
Morocco, hit by a drought this year;
Venezuela, whose economic disruption
has curbed production; Somalia, where
conflict has prevented planting of much
cropland; and East European countries,
subject to both drought and economic
disruption. Most of the countries in which
1993 production is likely to be 10 percent
or more below average will not experience
food problems, however, because they can
afford to increase imports or, in some
cases, will still have surpluses for export.

 

enhance our ability to estimate the scope of
the crisis while increasing international pres-
sure to act. Still, some crises—especially in
areas that are less accessible or where con-
flict is intense—may be considered too costly
or complex to undertake large-scale relicf

efforts. ||

The United States will be expected to take
the lead in identifying and responding to
humanitarian crises.

syhe 6

Sub-Saharan Africa

Africa will continue to generate humanitar-
ian emergencies on an unparalleled scale.
Despite progress toward peace in some coun-
tries and the end of the drought in the
southern part of the continent, Africa still
has most of the world’s refugees—about

6 million—and three to four times that many
Page-13
displaced persons. Moreover, African gov-
ernments on the whole are the world’s needi-
est and least able to cope with their
emergencies:

* More than half of the world’s poorest
countries are found in Sub-Saharan
Africa.

« Africa has 12 ongoing insurgencies, includ-
ing those in Rwanda and Mozambique
where cease-fires are in force but rebels
have not been disarmed.

« The AIDS epidemic is spreading through
all of Africa and straining its already
feeble health care systems; of the 13 mil-
lion people worldwide infected with the
HIV virus, 8 million are in Africa.

During the coming year, international aid
and intervention will be necessary to stave
off human catastrophes in parts of Africa. In
addition to emergency shipments of food and
medicine, the transition from war to peace in
some areas will require assistance in refugee
resettlemeni, infrastructure repair, landmine
removal, and support for demobilized mili-
tary forces.

The Horn: More Turmoil in Store

Somalia. The massive international relief
effort has ended the starvation, and some
local councils are beginning to function
again. Nevertheless, instability in Mogadi-
shu and random violence in the countryside
make the recovery precarious. Most of the
1.3 million refugees and displaced persons in
camps remain dependent on international
assistance, and the majority of international
relief workers—forced to leave by the earlier

 

Sperét

violence—-have not returned. The security of
food supplies and delivery is problematic.
Without a continued international effort,

widespread hunger and disease could reap-
pear quickly

Sudan. The civil war in the south is creating
humanitarian conditions as severe as those in
Somalia last year. The intensified govern-
ment offensive against the rebels makes the
task of reaching the 1.5 million southerners
in need of humanitarian assistance—800,000
of whom are already at risk of starvation—
even more difficult. An additional 1 million
people elsewhere in Sudan— including
600,000 displaced in the transition zone
between north and south—now need
humanitarian assistance. Another 200,000
are in danger of being caught in the fighting
and may join the 350,000 Sudanese rcfugees
who already have fled to neighboring coun-
tries—primarily Zaire and Uganda.

Sudan has enough food to meet most of its
needs but has provided only about half of the
grain promised for relief in the south. The
government suspects that relief efforts are
aiding the rebels; all sides have impeded the
flow of aid. Khartoum would oppose a US-
or UN-led relief intervention in the south

and would likely stage guerrilla attacks on
foreign military forces and sicrat
Meanwhile, locust infestations in both
Somalia and Sudan have become serious and
are likely to aggravate the food crises in both
countries. The political situation in northern
Somalia precludes international eradication
efforts there; in Sudan, UN sources say the

locust infestation will worsen if current
weather conditions persist. (U)

Sptret
Page-14
|
|
|
|
!

 

i
i
‘
i
i

Figure 3
Africa and the Middle East

 

 

North
Atlantic
Ocean

cave verde

South
Atiantie.
Ocean

 

Algeria

s.
aes Ba

Africa

   
    
   

Tanzania

  

 

* Mogadishu

dachian

Dee sogcetes

Comoros

Madagascar Mwntin

Rowmnon
rane

Indian
Ocean

Seanday worms
Petrmcraarny etree

 

 

inclassified

Spéfet

 

Taonge WONT TODA
Page-15
Southern Africa: Drought Ends,
But Peace Elusive

About 4 million people in this region are in
danger of starvation.

Angola. Some 2 million are at risk as a result
of a more destructive phase of the 16-year
civil war. Relief organizations have substan-
tial supplies in-country, but logistic con-
straints and attacks on food convoys and
relief flights will contribute to even greater
starvation; deaths per day may now exceed
several hundred. The UN and other relief
organizations, however, have little reliable
data on the location and numbers of people

Mozambique. The signing of peace accords
has facilitated relief deliveries to the

1.8 million persons who depend on aid, al-
though food deliveries are still subject to
interdiction by armed bands. Ample rains
this year have helped improve the local har-
vest; but, by yearend, surplus stocks of
maize—both donated and locally pro-
duced—will be expended, and additional
shipments will be needed. Moreover, uncer-
tain security conditions and a ruined infra-
structure will hamper resettlement efforts
that are slated to begin late this year for
1.5 million refugees, several million dis-
placed persons, and at least 60,000 demobi-
lized soldiers. Until the former combatants
are disarmed, a breakdown in security still
could lead to an acute humanitarian crisis.

Peace Possible Elsewhere,
But Conflict More Likely

Rwanda and Liberia. Recent peace accords
are allowing supplies to flow to populations
dependent on international relief in Liberia

~ substantial portions of Zaire’s 40 million

 

and Rwanda. If the accords hold, the inter-
national community will be called upon to
help resettle about 700,000 refugees and
more than 185,000 displaced persons in
Liberia and nearly 1 million displaced per-
sons and 2U,000 to 500,000 refugees in
Rwanda. Chances of renewed conflict in
both countries remain high, however.

Sierra Leone. More than 20 percent of the
population has been displaced or has left the
country as a result of fighting in the south-
east. Some 240,000 already are dependent on
feeding programs, another 300,000, most of
whom are in Liberia, are expected to return
from neighboring countries, and up to
300,000 more are internally displaced but
not currently receiving aid. The government
seems to have the upper hand against the

rebels, but the end of the insurgency is far
from certain. =

Zaire. Three years of political impasse
between the President and his opposition has
led to a breakdown in central control. The
collapse of basic services, ethnic strife, and
looting and violence by unpaid soldiers have
reduced the availability of food. Malnutri-.
tion and disease are at high levels in the
capital, and low food reserves in all provinces
make localized famine in urban arcas likely
over the next.three to six months. The vio-
lence so far has displaced over 500,000. If

population begin to flee across borders, as
some already have, neighboring Angola,
Zambia, Rwanda, Uganda, and Sudan could
not cope with the influx)

Europe
After Africa, the world’s most acute

humanitarian crises are concentrated in the
former Yugoslavia. Some 4.3 million people,
Page-16
Segfet

acording to the United Nations High Com-
missionerfor Refugees (UNHCR), are in
need of aid—two-thirds of them in Bosnia.

Long-term subsistence on minimal food sup-
plies, limited medical care, severe shortages
of water and sanitation supplies, and damage
to housing have left the Muslim population
in Bosnia weakened, more susceptible to
disease, and progressively less capable of
surviving bouts of hunger and cold. The
infrastructure in central and eastern Bosnia
is severely damaged, and many towns there
are dependent on the humanitarian relief
effort. Relief deliveries fall short of demand
and are hampered by insufficient resources,
fighting and denial of access, poor road
conditions, bureaucratic hurdles, and bad
weather]

If War Continues ...

The impact of continued conflict will be
more devastating this winter than anything
we have seen thus far. Tens of thousands
could perish from disease, hunger, and cold.
If fighting continues as we expect, the Bosnian
population in need will be double that of last
winter—or about 2.8 million people. Total
relicf requirements during the next six
months will be an estimated 390,000 metric
tons—equal to about 19,500 C-130H flights
at maximum payload—about 80 percent of
which will be food.

Food reserves in Bosnia have been largely
consumed. A harsh winter this year—unlike
last year’s unusually mild one—will make

? By comparison, the UNHCR sent 120,000 metric tons of
relief supplies into Bosnia during the first six months of this
year: in March 1993, UNHCR delivered 25,000 metric tons—
the largest single monthly shipment to date. (U)

spcte 10

   

Figure 4. Residents of Sarajevo line up to get Time ©
their water from a runoff pipe flowing into a t
suburban river. (v)

Figure 5
Former Yugoslavia

 

 

 

 

 

TOTS RMT TOT

Unclassified

relief deliveries throughout much of Bosnia
more difficult at the same time that humani-
tarian needs are highest.

... And If the Fighting Stops
The humanitarian outlook would improve,
but needs would dictate a substantial relief
Page-17
operation. Requirements could total as high
as 270,000 MT of aid over the next six
months. Planning figures by the UNHCR
suggest that such an operation—through
normal relief agency channels—would cost
about $200 million. The amount of aid would
reach this level as significant population
displacements occur, including the move-
ment within Bosnia of as many as 200,000
Muslims from Croat- and Serb-controlled
areas to the central Muslim core; of about
60,000 Croats to western Bosnia; and 20,000
to 50,000 Serbs to other parts of Bosnia. In
addition, about 200,000 Muslim refugees
probably would return from Croatia to
Bosnia, as would about the same number of
Serb refugees from Serbia itsel

Croatia. The UNHCR lists about 530,000
persons—250,000 displaced Croatians and
more than 280,000 refugees from Bosnia—in
need of assistance. (uv) .

Kosovo. If ethnic fighting expanded into
Kosovo, we would expect that over 300,000
Albanian refugees initially will flow into

Albania and Macedonia, and many more
would flee as the fighting spread

Central Eurasia

Conflicts along the southern flank of the
former Soviet Union will generate acute
needs for humanitarian assistance. Most
regimes are less stable than they were a year
ago. Virtually the entire Caucasus region, for
example, is embattled or under blockade,
and disputes among Tajikistan’s clans and
regional factions continue to impede efforts
to provide relief and resettle refugees.

  
  

Socret

Conditions in Azerbaijan, Armenia, and
Georgia are worse than last year. Azerbaijan’s
war with its ethnic Armenian-dominated
enclave, Nagorno-Karabakh, has escalated
since June with a Karabakh-Armenian
offensive, sending some 300,000 Azeris
toward the Iranian border. Tehran—already
burdened by 2 million Afghan refugees—is
delivering relief supplies and establishing
displaced person camps on the Azerbaijan
side of the border in an effort to prevent the
Azeris from crossing into Iran; Turkey is
providing funds for other camps. Baku can-
not provide for its nearly 1 million refugees
and displaced persons while it wages a losing
war, struggles to resolve a leadership crisis,
and tries to cope with regional secessionist
movements in the north and south. We esti-
mate the fighting this year alone has dis-
placed more than 400,000 people. Living
onditions can be expected to worsen as

1 ts in and food supplies dwindle.

rmeénia is all but cut off from the outside
world by civil strife in Georgia and an
Azerbaijani blockade. During what is
expected to be its second consecutive harsh
winter, Armenia will face shortages of food,
oil, water, and electricity. Turkey will
restrict use of its territory for delivery of
relief supplies to Armenia as long as the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict continues, and
airlifts will be necessary to sustain the
population.

The ethnic and civil conflicts in Abkhazia

and western Georgia will continue, with full-
blown civil war a possibility. T'bilisi’s access
routes north to Russia and west to Black Sea

syn
Page-18
ret

Figure 6
Caucasus Region

 

 

RUSSIA

  

Syria

 

 
 
  
   
  
   

   

7) *hounderyberwoen Chechonisand
|) Ingushetia has not beun established,

  
 

 

        
    
        
   

ge
Ne on, Kaze
. \
4
Kabardino- a
. Balkaria 2 7 !
Ne :
Sukhumi \_ Chechenia® : Caspian
Black Sea
Sea GEORGIA
eiilisi
— 7
ARMENIA ;.— AZERBAIJAN 7
é “os Baku
‘4 Nagorno
\ Marah
LL

Sn

 

100Mies

 

 

Unclassified

ports are tenuous and subject to frequent
disruption. Emergency deliveries of food and
medicine—in addition to current aid in the
pipeline—will be needed during the winter.

séeret 12

730033 OOK) 1014

Territorial and ethnic conflicts are also
brewing in the North Caucasus region of
Russia—particularly the republics of
Ingushetia, Chechenia, and North Ossetia.
Limited local warfare in those areas over the
Page-19
next several months is likely and will produce
refugees who will need support. Conflict in

the North Caucasus will hinder supply
routes into the entire Caucasus recon. my
More than 30,000 Tajik refugees have been
repatriated from Afghanistan to southern
Tajikistan, but efforts to reintegrate them
are failing and the humanitarian situation
there probably will worsen. The population
of the Pamirs—swollen by more than 30,000
displaced persons and refugees returning
from Afghanistan—faces a winter of famine
if relief routes are not kept open. By October,
snows will cut off much of the region. Mean-
while, the impoverished Gorno-Badakhshan
and wealthier Leninabad regions are both
operating independently from Dushanbe.

The lack of central government control,
hinder relief and resettlement efforts

South Asia

Ethnic warfare—particularly in Afghanistan
and, on a smaller scale, in Sri Lanka—will
continue to generate humanitarian needs in
South Asia. Conflicts will keep about

6 million people dislocated and dependent on
humanitarian assistance. Pakistan will re-
main dependent on international support as

long as it hosts significant numbers of
Afghan refuses mE

In Afghanistan, fighting in Kabul and along
the Afghan-Tajik border, as well as guerrilla
attacks throughout the country, has wors-
ened over the past year and will displace
more Afghans, hinder refugee repatriation,
and impede the delivery of international aid.
Without emergency relief, about 5 million

people—either refugees or internally dis-
placed persons—would suffer from food and

 

syefe

fuel shortages, inadequate water and elec-
tricity, and epidemics. About 1.5 million
Afghans are internally displaced, 1.5 million
more are refugees in Pakistan, and another
2 million are in Iran. In addition, at least
some 60,000 Tajiks fled to northern Afghan-
istan after civil war erupted in Tajikistan last
year.

The job of delivering emergency aid in
Afghanistan has become more treacherous.
Factional fighting and lack of central gov-
ernment control have heightened the threat
to aid workers. Relief operations staged in
Afghanistan rely heavily on air transport,
which is vulnerable to Afghan guerrillas
armed with antiaircraft weapons. Overland

transport to isolated populations requires the
cooperation of local warlords. =
Elsewhere in the region, the civil war in Sri
Lanka that pits the Sinhalese majority
against Tamil separatists will continue to
inflict hardships on the populations in the
north and east of the island. Some 600,000

people have been dislocated by the conflict,
and about 80,000 refugees remain in India.

Middle East-North Africa

Traq will be the only country in this region
likely to generate substantial emergency
humanitarian needs unrelated to natural
disasters during the next year. The Kurdish
population will face harsh conditions this
winter; the number of Kurds requiring assis-
tance has grown from 750,000 to 1.2 million
over the past year, and the Kurds have
become even more dependent on international

Soctet
Page-20
sult

Figure 7

Afghanistan and Tajikistan

 

 

Iran

 

Turkmenistan

 
 

Uzbekistan

Leninabad
Oblast

Obiast

AFGHANISTAN

Pakistan

 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 

Gorno-Badakhshan
Autonomous /?

 
  

China

    
 

donmpir sy)

 
 
 
 

India

 

 

Unclassified

syle

 

7300314 (ROODTS) 1098
Page-21
Figure 8 Thanks to Baghdad's
continuing blockade, the Kurds of
northern Iraq will spend their third
winter as dependents af the inter-
national relief system. (v)

help. In addition, a health crisis is developing
in parts of the North where the lack of

electricity—which was cut off by \—

is curtailing access to safe water

As a result of Baghdad’s ongoing embar;
of the north, the UN estimates that over
90 percent of Kurdish food, fuel, and

medical needs must come from territory that ~

is not controlled by Baghdad. Shortfalls in
the funding of relief agencies, harassment by
the Iraqi Government, harsh weather that
would close convoy routes, and a possible end
to cooperation from Turkey—through which
the aid flows—will cot eaten
relief efforts this wint

The 100,000 to 150,000 Shiasin the south-
ern marshes of Iraq—site of a low-level
insurgency—are likely to be at risk of severe
food shortages over the next few months.
Baghdad continues to dry out a substantial
hlands where the Shia live,

  

 

We cannot verify the extent of acute needs in
southern Iraq. Baghdad denies the UN and

other relief organizations access to the area.
The only route for delivering relief would be

through Iran and would uire smuggling

supplies past Iraqi troo

East Asia~Pacific

The region is expected to have its usual share
of emergencies stemming from natural disas-
ters, but the number of people dependent on
emergency aid for survival—displaced per-
sons and refugees—will continue to decline
as noted in last year’s Estimate. Cambodian
refugees have returned home from Thailand
as a result of a UN-brokered peace agree-
ment. In addition, improved conditions in
Vietnam are encouraging many Vietnamese
refugees to repatriate from asylum in Hong

_ Indonesia, Malaysia, and elsewhere.
Sigh
Page-22
Sderet

Figure 9. Extreme poverty and
political violence in Haiti are a
boon to the boat-building business
but could again spark massive
migration to the United States.

Cambodia will need food assistance during
the next year as more than 360,000 recently
returned refugees run out of UN rations and
Cambodians try to produce a crop without
adequate irrigation or fertilizers. Low-level
fighting and banditry will pose hazards for
donors distributing assistance outside the
capital. Moreover, the Khmer Rouge could
return to more intense warfare that would
once again displace large numbers of people,
send refugees fleeing across borders, and
dramatically increase the need for humani-
tarian assistance.

 

 

Wideworld ©

Latin America~Caribbean

Most humanitarian needs at present can be
handled through routine aid programs. Des-
perate economic conditions and political
repression in Haiti and Cuba, however,
could bring calls for emergency relief and
stimulate sudden and massive migration that
would necessitate direct US assistance.
Page-23
Figure 10
Countri

 

 

 

rthquake

Country “Geophysical I

Armenia

Burma

Caribbean iskinds
Chile

China

Costa Rica

Cuba

 

{Salvador
Greece
Guatemala
India
Indonesia
tran
Italy
Japan
Kyrgyzstan
Mexico,
Nicaragua
Pacific iskands
Pakistan
Panama
Peru
Philippines
South Korea

‘Turkey

“ Hurricanes and typhoons, which are limited to the

May-November periad in the Northern Hemisphere.

 

 

Meteorological Disas

rey eee

Fropical Cyclone* Flooding

 

Unclassified

Reverse lank
Page-24
Figure 11
Emergency/Critical Humanitarian Relief Needs Through 1994
Page-25
Be

r
RUSSIA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C  Contfiict fF] Currently necessitating

D Drought some kind of emergency

E Economic restructuring® humanitarian relief

N Natural disaster T Potentially necessitating

T Technological disaster some kind of emergency
humanitarian relief

inte former Soviet Union, every cout is eter
Page-26
Potential Humanitarian Eme
Generated by Conflict, 1993-

Country Persons Estimated Food Political Environment Physical Environment Airfields Ports Rail Highway Inland
in Need, Needs for Next Waterway
Mast Likely Six Months*
Number (metric tons)

 

 

 

Afghanistan S million 446,000 Deserts; scrub-covered ° e @ ° e

mountains

Extreme temperatures

Snow; summer dust
storms; earthquakes;
avalanches

 

 

QO

Albania 150,000 13,400 Reliable Forested mountains c e e 9

   

 

Angola 2 million 178,400 Unreliable Coastal lowlands ° ° e ° e

Civil war Interior highlands
Landmines Winter rain

 

Armenia 500,000 44,600 Government support - Mountainous »|o e ec ec e

. limited Little forestland
Hot, dry climate
Winter snow :
Earthquakes i
Droughts

 
 

 

Azerbaijan 900,000 80,300 Limiied government Large lowlands e ° ° ° °
control in west Mountains i

  

 

 

 

Winter snow
Page-27
e
Civil strife and ethnic warfare around the world are putting civilian
e I g e nN Cl e S populations at risk of death from starvation and disease. The 24
countries or areas below have either ongoing humanitarian crises
that are expected to persist through next year or have strong

- D 4 Prospects of such emergencies occurring over the next year.

 

 

Inland Fuel Medical

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Country Persons Estimated Food Political Environment
Waterway in Need, Needs for Next
Most Likely Six Months*
Number (metric tons)
e a Macedonia 150,000 13,300 Government likely to
cooperate
others substandard
Shortage of professional
personnel
Bed to population ratio: 1:2,054
o ag Below Western standards Physicians to population Mozambique 3 million 267,500 Fragile security
Numerous and well-spread ratio: 1:640 Bandit
facilities Bed to population ratio: 1:180 Landmines
Universal access refugees
Old equipment Demobilizing military
Personnel poorly trained : . Devastated economy
Critical shortage of drugs sont : Government welcomes aid
@ a Below Western standards Russia NA NA Government would
Shortages of personnel (Northern Caucasus) support relief
and supplies Some armed opposition
57 hospitals
20,000 beds (1:445 population)
1,000 physicians
:9,891 population)
Relies on aid and imports
e a System taxed by conflict Rwanda 133,800 Fragile security situation
Critical shortages of supplies .
Equipment outdated
Latest data 1989:
14,200 physicians (1:232 population)
30,000 beds (1:110 population)
° a System taxed by conflict Serbia and NA NA Government supports
Critical shortages of supplies Montenegro relief
Equipment outdated
Latest data 1989: Montenegro
28,000 physicians (1:250 population)
Page-28
For Official Use Only

 

‘Transportation infrastructure

© Supports relief effort
© Supports limited effort
© Support severely constrained
of no support
Double dots indicate quality
varies by region in country

 

Fuel infrastructure
@ Extensive

1 Limited

@ Very limited
NA Not available

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Support services poor

Physical Environment Airfie}ds Ports Rail Highway Inland Fuel Medical
Waterway

Mountainous ° e e e ° oa tandard
‘Sparse forests al shortages of supplics
Hot and dry and equipment
Winter snow Bed to population ratio: 1:170
Earthquakes Physicians to population ratio:
Droughts 1415
Plains o e G ce e oe Substandard
Forested plateaus. 143 hospitals
Subtropical south ; 24,300 beds (1:614 population)
Tropical center and north Physicians to population ratio:
October-November rains _ 1:48,375
> - ; . Severe shortages of supplies
Very high forested ° e e ° a NA

mountains
Winter snow
Highlands eo e « flo s Substandard
Scattered plains : 25 hospitals
‘Tropical climate * 7 7 peo 2,500 beds (1:3,400 population)
Winter rain--
Short, dry summer
Mountainous ° e ° ° °o
Sparse forests
Moderate climate,

little snow
Earthquakes
Page-29
89,200

 

 

 

 

Hot and humid : !

 

Azerbaijan 900,000 80,300 Limited government Large lowlands e °
control in west Mountains in north
and west
Semiarid
Winter snow
Drought
Bosnia-Herzegovina 2.8 million 315,000 Unreliable Forested mountains c e
Little government control Extreme temperatures
Landmines
At times, all factions
oppose relief
to other parties
Cambodia 360,000 32,100 Factional strife Flatlands °o °c
Landmines Rolling hills
Government supports Dense forest
telef Low wetlands
Theft, corruption Monsoons
Typhoons
Flooding
Croatia 530,000 47,300 Government supports Interior plains: G e
relief hot summer,
ic stri winter snow
. Potential ethnic strife Coastal highlands
dry summer, :
, mild winter
y :
Georgia 500,000 44,600 Government supports relief | Mountains: cold, ce e
Controt of countryside snowy winters
doubtful Lowlands near Black Sea:
mild winter, dry summer
Haiti 900,000 80,300 Minimal government Mountainous ce
support for relict Summer rain :
Warm, humid year-round /
Hurricanes :
Earthquakes i
Traq 1.3 million 115,900 Government can deliver Mostly flat e °
support throughout Northern mountains
country Desert
Government hinders Freezing temperatures,
telicf to Kurds and Shias north and desert
Dust/sand storms
Heat/dehydration
Liberia i million, Flat, some forestland o ©
Page-30
10,000 nurses (1:

m taxed by confli Serbia and NA Government supports
I shortages of supplies Montenegro relief
Equipment outdated
Latest data Montenegro
28,000 physicians (1:250 population)
71,000 beds (1:98 population)
Infrastructure damaged or Serbia NA NA Government supports
destroyed relief for Serb
Serious shortages of refugees
personnel and supplies
Much equipment nonfunctional
Physicians to population
| “ratio: 1:580 “
Bed to population ratio: 1:220
Rudimentary Kosovo NA NA ‘Government opposes
s: damaged, relief for ethnic Albania
lack piped water and electricity and Bosnian Muslim
1,100 population) refugees
700 physicians (1:12,200 population)
Shortages of all supplies
Best system in former Yugoslavia Sierra Leone NA NA No government assistance fj
Many large hospitals in or opposition to reli+f
Zagreb provide Western Insurgents along,
standard of services Liberia border
Sufficient, qualified physicians 1:390 :
Shortages of other personnel
System taxed by conflict Somalia 13 million 115,900 No local authority can
Critical shortages of supplies assist relief
Equipment outdated Opposition from clans,
32,000 physicians bandits, religious radi
(1:171 population)
60,000 Leds
(1:92 population)
Substandard : 5,830 beds (1:1,103 population) Sudan © 302,200 -: Civil war.
Little service in rural are: a wn Ns : OOH Government and rebels
Critical shortages of. . BES ‘obstruct rel
” personnel, supplies, Landmines
and equipment ‘
964 physicians (1:6,673 population)
60 poorly equipped hospitals
(22.in capital) .
System operating at half capacity 1,000 dentists (1:18,000 population) Tajikistan 300,000 26,800 ‘Government cannot
Supplies scarce 8,000 support personnel assist relief in south
Personnel mostly in cities (1:2,200 population) or east
250 hospitals Armed opposition
Bed to population ratio: 1:600
7,000 physicians
(1:2,600 population)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

500,000

 

 

 

Government cannot. |
Page-31
supports Mountainous ° ° ° Facilities are old,
Sparse forests poorly maintained, overcrowded,
Moderate climate, and lack Western capabi
little snow Many qualified physicians in Serbia
Earthquakes Support services poor
Droughts Supplies available
Bed to population ratio: 1:170
Physicians to population ratio:
> a 11s
kupports Northern plains e c °
Southern mountains
Cold, snowy winter
Hot, humid summer
opposes c c C a System taxed by poor economy,
nic Albanians | — by mountains political tensions
Muslim. Summer, hot and dry Some hospitals closed
Winter snow Bed to population ratio: 1:320
Droughts Physicians to population ratio:
Earthquakes 1:890
‘Swamps; beaches e @ a Substandard
Low plains Some qualified physicians
Highlands Facilities and equipment poor
Tropical climate Shortages of supplies
Seasonal changes .
Constant heat and
humidity
Large plateau e e e o Substandard
Coastal plain 90 hospitals prewar, now damaged
Mountains in north No supplies available on
Sparse rain open market
Severe heat UNISOM II medical support
Drought ‘meets US standards
Assessment of personnel
or beds not possible
Desert, extreme heat c Cc C a Below Western standards
in north 164 hospitals: old, overcrowded,
Swamp, forest, flooding unsanitary
in south Critical shortages of personne?
and supplies
2,170 physicians (1:11,153 population)
90 percent of medicine and alt
. equipment imported
Mountainous ce ° e a Basic services unavailable
Very cold in Pamir to most of population
Mountains Facilities deteriorating
Semiarid lower areas Critical shortages of supplies
15,000 physicians (1:3,401 population)
55,000 hospital beds
(1:92 population)
Equipment outdated
‘Swamps in north a) co NA Substandard
| Plateaus in south :

 

 

 

 

 

A fow Facilitine have modern
Page-32
Georgia 500,000 44,600 Government supports relief | Mountains: cold, cele e e e
Control of countryside snowy winters,
doubtful Lowlands near Black Sea:
mild winter, dry summer
Haiti 900,000 80,300 Minimal government Mountainous :| @¢ ce e ec @
support for relief Summer rain LG
. Warm, humid year-round *
Hurricanes
Earthquakes 4
Iraq 1.3 million 115,900 Government can deliver Mostly flat e ° e e e
4 support throughout Northern mountains
4 country Desert
q Government hinders Freezing temperatures,
relief to Kurds and Shias north and desert
: Dust/sand storms
. . Heat/dehydration
Liberia 89,200” Limited government Flat,some forestland ° * ° e © e
control : > Hot and humid :
Insurgents Rainy and dry seasons
Bandits .
'
= In areas |
fog
combat,
require
, shelter,
Local transport for relicf supplies is often inadequate for the task. poputatl
4 Thi le in Somalia has seen some rough roads, E
3 crs sat

 

  

Sed TS Sa a pas
Attacks on UN forces and officials responding to humanitarian °
‘emergencies have increased over the past year.

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

" Estimates of food needs forthe aext sis months are based on UNICEF s standard of
{the minimum necessary for surat: 490 grams of food‘person day, except Bosnia
bere UNLICR's standard of winter foud needs=614 grams‘person/day-was used,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tes iS ie
Page-33
e c ‘System taxed by conflict Somalia 1.3 million 115,900 No local authority can
ical shortages of supplies assist relict
Equipment outdated Opposition from clans,
32,000 physicians bandits, religious radicals
(1:171 population)
60,000 beds
(1:92 population)
e a Substandard 5,830 beds (1:1,103 population) Sudan 302,200 Civil war
service in rural areas Government and rebels
Critical shortages of obstruct relief to south
personnel, supplies, Landmines
4 and equipment
3 964 physicians (1:6,673 population)
3 60 poorly equipped hospitals
3 (22 in capital)
e a System operating at half capacity 1,000 dentists (1:18,000 population) Tajikistan 300,000 26,800 Government cannot
Supplies scarce 8,000 support personnel assist relief in south
Personnel mostl (1:2,200 population) oreast
E 250 hospitals Armed opposition
Be (1:2,600 population)
10,000 nurses (1:1,800 population)
2 = : =
3 e = 36 hospitals before current No ability to produce drugs or’ ~ Zaire 500,000 44,600 * Government cannot- © —
4 conflict; many‘now damaged, other supplies . . assist relief .
& destroyed Little or no wuthority
4 1,800 beds (1:1,359 population) Crime and extortion
Bk Physicians to population ratio:
a 1:8,000
4 Personnel poorly trained
Inarsas of conflict, a range
A of logis ond fa
St} coml orces could be
itera red meee be Hostile envirunments sometimes prevent the timely f.
sat risk. delivery of aid to people in need. Sarajevo airport has - &
3 = Frequently come under attack.
; ra
,
ae
s pf
4 if
x {Landimines can be majorimpediments tthe delivery of aid ‘
aX Here in Cambodia, a UN vehicle is destroyed,
: Even at global nceds grow, the ask of|
‘more dangerous. Herein Somalia, fo
2 at cach stage of delivery.
€

 

 

ern

 

Le

 

 

iilkes

 

 

 

 

HT ee TTT Test TTT
Page-34
2S hority can Large plateau e @ ° e e a Substandard

: Coastal plain 90 hospitals prewar, now damaged
No supplies available on

open market

UNISOM IT medical support

 
 

igious radicals

Severe heat

 

 

  

 

Drought meets US standards
Assessment of personnel
or beds not possible
Desert, extreme heat Cc e € C Cc a Below Wester standards
it and rebels innorth 164 hospitals: old, overcrowded,
lief to south ‘Swamp, forest, flooding unsanitary
in south Critical shortages of personnel
and supplies
rs 2,170 physicians
90 percent of me:
4 equipment imported
‘eat cannot Mountainous ce e ° e e oe services unav:
in south Very cold in Pamir st of popu
Mou

 
 
 

s deteriorating
Critical shortages of sup,
15,000 physicians (1:3,491 population)
55,000 hospital beds

(1:92 population)
Equipment outdated

t cannot Swampsinnorth ce lc ce lce fc NA Substandard oe
ies have modern

Semiarid lower ateas

 

 
 

 

 

       

civil authority,

 

Dense vegetation over

i
half the country Shortages of personnel

and supplies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ON forces acgotiate their entry into a village controlled
by Kemer Rouge guerillas in Cambodia.

   

  

 

 

 

reds grow, the task of re ponding becomes °
Here in Somalia, food rust be guarded
felivery.

 

 

For Official Use Only

 

 

 

 

OUT eT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SMTi Mire