
Page-0
’

 

@)

Director of Secret.

Central
Intelligence

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1999

‘Gorbachev's Economic

Programs: The
Challenges Ahead

National Intelligence Estimate

This National Intelligence Estimate represents
the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the

US Intelligence Community.

—Seeret

NIE 11-23-88
December 1988

Corr 27%
Page-1
’

 

@)

Director of Secret.

Central
Intelligence

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1999

‘Gorbachev's Economic

Programs: The
Challenges Ahead

National Intelligence Estimate

This National Intelligence Estimate represents
the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the

US Intelligence Community.

—Seeret

NIE 11-23-88
December 1988

Corr 27%
Page-2
Warning Notice Intelligence Sourc

   
  
  

 

National Se Unauthorized Disclosure
Subject to Criminal Sanctions

 

 

 

 

Dissemination Control NOFORN (NF) Not releasable to foreign nationals 2

Abbreviations NOCONTRACT (NG) Not releasable to contractors or contractor/consuljaes
PROPIN (PR) Caution—proprietary information involyad~ °
ORCON (OC) Dissemination and extractignoPtiformation

   
 

 

 

 

  
   
  

controlled by
REL... This inforefation has been authorized for release to...
: WN _——WNINTEL— Intelligence sources or methods involved
A microfiche copy ofskeocu- Classified by 622649
ment is availableTrom OIR/ ——_Declassify: OADR
DLBIAB7-7177k printed copies Derived from multiple sources

m CPAS/IMC (482-5203: or
AIM request to userid
CPASIMC).

  

All matey
is Unetassi
Page-3
Director of
Central
Intelligence

NIE 11-23-88

Gorbachev's Economic
Programs: The
Challenges Ahead

Information available as of 20 December 1988 was used
in the preparation of this National Intelligence Estimate.

The following intelligence organizations participated
in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense Intelligence Agency

The National Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

The Office of Intelligence Support,

Department of the Treasury

also participating:

The Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff

for Intelligence, Department of the Army

The Office of the Director of Naval

Intelligence, Department of the Navy

The Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff,

Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Intelligence, Department of Energy

The Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps

This Estimate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board.

—Seeret

December 1988
Page-4
Key Judgments

We believe that Gorbachev’s efforts at reviving the Soviet economy will
produce no substantial improvement over the next five years, although his
efforts to raise consumer welfare could achieve some modest results. Soviet
attempts to raise technology levels will not narrow the gap with the West in
most sectors during the remainder of this century.'

Gorbachev’s economic program has so far failed consumers, who, accord-
ing to anecdotal evidence, probably feel somewhat worse off now than they
did when Gorbachev assumed power in 1985. To improve consumer
welfare, Gorbachev has begun to place more emphasis on housing, food
processing, and light industry; and the defense industry is being told to
increase its production for consumers. Gorbachev has also sought to expand
the private and cooperative sectors through long-term leasing arrange-
ments in both agriculture and industry. These initiatives are the ones that
are most likely to improve the quality of life in the Soviet Union over the
next five years.

Gorbachev’s effort to reform the country’s system of planning and
management and to improve the country’s capital stock is going poorly. Ill-
defined reform legislation, interference by ministries, and piecemeal
implementation are creating disruptions and preventing progress. Reforms
already planned in the state sector will probably be implemented slowly.
Sharp moves toward a market economy would be very disruptive and would
jeopardize popular support for his programs. Nevertheless, Gorbachev has
often dealt with setbacks by adopting radical measures, and we cannot rule
out an effort to move rapidly toward a market economy in the state sector.

To promote growth of private enterprise, Moscow must allow more
flexibility and reliance on the market for leasing and cooperative arrange-
ments in order to increase significantly the production of goods and
services for consumers. A resentful public and skeptical bureaucracy will
make this difficult. Lease contracting in agriculture will remain bound by
centrally directed procurement targets, reliance on state supplies, and a

' The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that this uneven performance could
include sufficient improvement in the Soviets’ economic and technical base to facilitate
fulfillment of future military requirements. Moreover, since the Soviets already lead in
several key defense technologies, they should be able to continue assimilating technology
gains in this sector.

at —Secret-
NE 11-23-68

 

Up.ik blankj
Page-5
recalcitrant bureaucracy. The comparatively high prices of privately
supplied goods will spur inflation. An added problem for Moscow is that
these reforms probably will be most successful, at least initially, in non-
Russian areas such as the Baltic states and the Caucasus.

We do not foresee a large, sustained increase in Soviet imports from the
West. The Soviets may increase borrowing to perhaps $3-4 billion net per
year over the next few years. Even a much larger surge in borrowing from
the West, which we think is unlikely, would not aid the overall economy
substantially or ameliorate the resource competition between the military
and civilian sectors. A few industries may benefit, however.

We judge Gorbachev will divert additional resources from defense—
including managers, equipment designers, investment funds, and plant
capacity—to his civilian programs. While we recognize there is some
redundant defense plant capacity, significant increases in the production of
goods for the civilian sector would require a diversion of resources from the
military. Diversion from defense to civilian objectives will escalate conflicts
over resource allocation because it could delay upgrades to weapons plants,
thereby postponing the introduction of new systems. Clearly there are
strong economic pressures for major reductions in military spending.
Striking the right balance will involve many leadership arguments and
decisions over the entire period of this Estimate. In any case, the large-
scale modernization of Soviet defense industries in the 1970s has already
put in place most of the equipment needed to produce weapon systems
scheduled for deployment through the early 1990s.?

Moscow will press harder on Eastern Europe for more and higher quality
machinery and consumer goods, for greater participation in joint projects,
and for greater contributions to Warsaw Pact defense. Such demands will
produce only marginal benefits for the USSR-because of real economic
constraints in Eastern Europe and the reluctance of its regimes to increase
their help to the Soviets.

There is some chance that Gorbachev’s economic programs may not
survive. Disruptions, such as widespread reform-related work stoppages or.
a drastic drop in performance indicators, might strengthen conservative
Opposition. Such trends, coupled with continuing nationality turmoil, could
force the leadership into a major retreat.

* The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, holds an alternative view that a critical
distinction must be made between near-term resource allocation trade-offs that can be
made without significantly disrupting current defense procurement, and those of the longer
term where a downward turn in defense spending trends may result in reordering or
Stretching out of weapons procurement.
Page-6
Given the severity of Soviet economic problems, Gorbachev needs the
many benefits of a nonconfrontational international environment. This
gives the United States and its allies considerable leverage in bargaining
with the Soviets over the terms of that environment on some security issues
such as regional conflicts and arms control and on some internal matters
such as human rights and information exchange. The margins of this
leverage will be set by Moscow’s determination not to let the West affect
the fundamental nature of the Soviet system or its superpower status.’

” For a fuller discussion of these issues, see SNIE 11-16-88, Soviet Policy During the Next
Phase of Arms Control in Europe, November 1988; NIE 11-3/8-88, Soviet Forces and
Capabilities for Strategic Nuclear Conftict Through the Late 1990s (Volume 1), December
1988; and the forthcoming Estimates NIE 11-14-88, Trends and Developments in Warsaw
Pact Theater Forces and Doctrine, 1988-2007; and NIE 11-4-89, Soviet Strategy Toward
the West: The Gorbachev Challenge.

CAeverse. blank3
Page-7
Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page
Key Judgments iii
Discussion 1
The Need for Change 1
A Bold Action Plan 2
Clearing the Political Track 3
Slow Progress 6
Altering Economic Strategy 9
Outlook 10
Implications for the West 13
On Arms Control 13
For Eastern Europe and Soviet Client States 14
In Commercial Relations 14
For Western Leverage 15
Annex A. The “‘Kosygin Reform” 17
Annex B. The Budget Deficit 19
Annex C. Soviet Economic Reform: Signs of a Radical 21
Economic Shift
Annex D. Update on Joint Ventures 23

 

 

Mo —Sesret
Page-8
Discussion:

The Need for Change

A simple growth formula—ever increasing inputs of
labor and capital—resulted in rapid economic gains
for the Soviet Union in the postwar era. This postwar
system placed heavy stress on quantity rather than
quality. Because there was an abundance of low-cost,
readily available resources, there was little concern
for efficiency and productivity. As the USSR moved
out of the reconstruction phase in the 1960s, this
growth formula became less effective. Labor supply .
growth slowed, ever larger expenditures were required
to exploit natural resources, and the inefficiencies
inherent in central planning became more acute as the
economy grew.

Military spending also has increasingly hindered eco-
nomic performance. To support the military effort,
Moscow created an institutional mechanism reaching
from the highest state bodies down through layers of
administrative control to individual enterprises, thus
ensuring priority to defense programs. As a result of
this priority, the defense sector’s share of national
output grew and by the mid-1980s consumed 15 to 17
percent of GNP. The incentive structure—wages,
bonuses, perquisites—was designed to favor those who
worked in or supported the defense industry. The
defense sector was given priority access to raw materi-
als, machinery and cquipment, subcomponents, scien-
tists, engineers, and skilled workers, preempting con-
sumption and investment in the civilian sector. The

“General Secretary Gorbachev's efforts at reforming the political
and economic fabric of the Soviet Union have been under way for
more than three years. This Estimate reviews the progress of his
economic strategy, identifies the conflicts inherent in his approach,
and assesses the outlook for reform over the next five years. The
Soviet leader has set in motion a dynamic process whose outcome
cannot be predicted with confidence. There will continue to be
major alterations in the game plan, and a conservative reaction to
the strains unleashed by the current effort is possible. What is clear
is that the very fabric of Soviet ideology and institutions is being
questioned more than at any time since the revolution, and in the
Soviet Union there is a general consensus that retreating to the
economic and nolitical path existing when Gorbachev took over is
not tenable,

Soviet defense industry became the most technologi-
cally advanced and most effective sector of the econo-
my. This effectiveness was due primarily to the
priority that created the institutional mechanism
rather than greater efficiency. The defense industry
has been at least as inefficient and wasteful as the
civilian sector.

As a result of these factors, GNP growth slowed from
rates that were closing the economic and technologi,
cal gaps with the developed West during the 1950s‘
and 1960s to a range in the 1980s that allowed little
expansion of per capita output and stymied progress
in narrowing the technology gap. The large and still
growing burden of defense coupled with increasing
demands for investment in areas such as energy and
agriculture allowed no room for major increases in the
quantity and quality of consumer goods and services.

Brezhnev’s successors, then, were saddled with:
+ An antiquated industrial base and a defense sector
that was siphoning off high-quality resources need-

ed for economic improvement.

An energy sector beset by rapidly rising production
costs of oil, its major fuel.

Levels of technology that, for most areas, substan-
tially lagged those of the West. .

Inefficiencies inherent in the conflict between ever
more central planning and control and an increas-
ingly large and complex’ economy.

An inefficient farm sector that, despite large invest-
ments, still employed 20 percent of the Soviet labor
force compared with only 5 percent in the United
States.
Page-9
Figure |
USSR: Low Living Standards

Soviet consumption as a percentage
of US consumption, 1983

Total consumption

Durables

 

Figure 2
USSR: Lags in Key Technologies

Approximate length of US lead in years

   
 
 

  

Minicomputers

  

Mainframes

 
  
   

  

   
  

 

Household services Supercomputers

Health Microelectronics

Soft goods Numerically controlled !
machine tools

Food Flexible manufacturing
systems

Education Robots

Unclassified 319876 1288 Unclassified 319877 12.68

+ A hidebound, corrupt bureaucracy and inflexible
planning system that failed to provide the proper
signals for production and investment, retarded
scientific-technical innovation, and encouraged high
costs and massive waste of resources.

A Bold Action Plan

Gorbachev recognized the “pre-crisis” urgency of
these problems and initiated a bold strategy to deal
with them. He grouped his efforts to revive the
economy under the broad rubric of perestroyka, a
term that includes three major economic elements—
lighter economic discipline, industrial modernization,
and economic reform. The goal of these actions, we
believe, is to develop an economic environment capa-
ble of:

+ At least containing, if not narrowing, the growing
gaps in technology and economic performance with
the West, thereby also enabling Moscow to main-
lain its military competitiveness.

 

* Achieving major improvements in consumer welfare
to gain the cooperation and support of the masses
for perestroyka and to maintain regime legitimacy.

Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders recognize that

reaching these economic goals will take years, possi-

bly decades, and that progress toward them could be
greatly facilitated by a more nonconfrontational inter-
national environment. Gorbachev's efforts in arms
control, his political initiatives, and the campaign to
refurbish the USSR’s image are intended ‘to achieve
such an environment.

+

When Gorbachev first assumed office, he concentrat-

ed on extending and intensifying Andropov's disci-

pline campaign. His “human factors” initiatives —
discipline, temperance, and improved work incen-
tives—were intended to raise labor productivity and
to increase economic growth for the first two or three
years of the 1986-90 Five-Year Plan while industry
retooled. He also removed many inept and corrupt
managers and officials and attempted to rationalize
Page-10
ss

Figure 3
USSR: Per Capita Consumption in a
Global Perspective, 1985

Index: US=100

United States
France

West Germany
United Kingdom
Italy

Japan

Hungary

USSR

South Korea

1319879 1288

Unclassified

the organizational structure of the bureaucracy by
trimming slots and rearranging and combining func-
tions.

Gorbachev argued that industrial modernization was
the key to long-lasting improvement of the USSR’s
economic situation. His program was aimed at the
massive introduction of new machinery and the rapid
retirement of old equipment. This depended heavily
on major improvements in the machine-building and
metalworking sector that manufactures producer and
consumer durables and military hardware. (See inset,
“Machine Building—The Focus of Gorbachev's Mod-
ernization Plans.”)

Gorbachev's boldest proposals were focused on eco-
nomic reform of planning and management. These
changes—contained in the Basic Provisions for Fun-
damentally Reorganizing Economic Management, the

 

Law on the State Enterprise, and 11 decrees—were
approved at the Central Committee plenum in June
1987. This set of documents, together with decrees
adopted over the last three years that expanded the
role of the private sector, represents a design for the
most comprehensive reform of economic management
in the Soviet Union since the introduction of Stalinist
central planning in the late 1920s. The plan goes well
beyond the “Kosygin” reforms adopted in 1965 (see
annex A). The reform package is scheduled to be
“almost fully” in place by the beginning of 1991—the
first year of the 13th Five-Year Plan—and major
parts of the package are already in effect. (See the
table on pages 5 and 6.)

Clearing the Political Track

Gorbachev also proposed reforms of the political
system in part because of the ability of the entrenched
state and party bureaucracies to defeat past efforts at
economic reform. He aims to decentralize the Political
system to circumvent the resistance to reform at the
top and middle levels of the leadership—groups that
have forced him to compromise and slow implementa-
tion of his programs. The reforms place more deci-
sionmaking authority at the local level in hopes of
making the system more responsive to local economic
signals than to administrative dictates from the top.
His program for “democratization” is designed to
produce a more participatory political culture—en-
couraging local officials to take initiative to resolve
problems and giving the populace a greater say in
decisions.

At Gorbachev's initiative, measures were approved by
the national party conference in June 1988 to reduce
the size of the party apparatus, force local party chiefs
to stand for election as head of the'regional soviets,
and give the soviets new authority. These measures
aim at diminishing the ability of local party chiefs to
block controversial reforms and sensitizing local lead-
ers to popular sentiment on such economic issues as
more and better food and consumer goods. Glas-
nost—an element of political reform in the broadest
Page-11
Machine Building—The Focus of Gorbachev's
Modernization Plans

Gorbachev has argued that the key to long-lasting
improvement of the USSR’s economic situation is
the continuous introduction of increasingly pro-
ductive machinery and equipment. The moderniza-
tion program, therefore, depends heavily on im-
provements in machine building and metal-
working—the sector that produces these producer
durables, as well as consumer durables and mili-
tary hardware. The ambitious targets of the 1986-
90 plan reflect the sector's importance:

* Output is to increase by 43 percent during the
period 1986-90.

Targets for high-technology equipment are even
higher. Planned growth rates are especially high
for numerically controlled machine tools (125
percent), robots (225 percent), and processing
centers (330 percent).

Quality and technological levels are to improve
dramatically. By 1990, 85 to 90 percent of the
most important types of machinery output will
be up to “world technical levels,” compared with
13 to 15 percent for civilian machinery in 1986.
New machinery is to be at least 50 to 100 percent
more productive and reliable than previously
produced equipment.

New machinery is to be introduced more quickly
than in the past—by 1990, 13 percent of
machine-building output is to be in its first year
of production, up from 3 percent in 1985.

By 1990, 60 percent of the sector's own machin-
ery is to be new—that is, brought on line during
the preceding five years. To reach this goal,

investment in civil machine-building ministries is

to rise by 80 percent. Meanwhile, the withdraw-
al rate for old capital goods is to double by
1990, while the withdrawal rate for machinery
is to quadruple.

Machine building's struggle to meet these goals
was hindered, in part, by the quality control
program and new financial arrangements intro-
duced in 1987:

+ Production of numerically controlled machine
tools showed no growth in 1987, and production
of industrial robots declined.

* While newly introduced machines represent
about 9 percent of output, the Soviets admit toa
general lack of progress in meeting “world
standards.”

+ The pace of both investment and machinery
retirements has slowed markedly from the plan
guidelines.

Though machine builders will not reach their 12th
Five-Year Plan targets, the leadership has taken
Steps to revitalize modernization by refocusing
resources on priority areas including machinery
Sor consumers, the food program, transportation,
and construction. At the same time, the plan calls
for an intensification of the development of ma-
chine tool building, instrument building, electron-
ics, and electrical equipment—the same industries
targeted for preferential development in the origi-
nal 12th Five-Year Plan goals.
Page-12
Soviet Economic Reform::A

  

 

 

 

      
  

  

 

 

 

  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

Reform

Enterprise Wags -of- industry and ©

self-financing lity for; apfiagriculture; “hope” to com-

ceaplete ‘changeover of nonpro
Investment will be: finan eduction sphere to same
less through: budget allo
tions and more. thi
terprise’s own resources and:
- bank credits. ae

Regional/ Republics and local govern: /8:;Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Not yet introduced. Expansion ‘to.un-

local self- ments will have greater role .*:“Belorussia, Moscow a ° named regions. *

financing in forming their-own bud- Tatar ASSR, and Sverd-
gets and will be expected to, lovsk Oblast (RSFSR).
balance revenues and expen-
ditures. Revenues will be
formed from taxes levied on
enterprises within the region
or locale to fund social/
economic development. :

Planning Enterprises will produce a. -All enterprises and associa- State orders made up 86 | State orders are to
portion of their output in tions. State orders are to percent of industrial “eventually” drop to
compliance with mandatory make up an estimated 40 production. 20 to 25 percent of
state orders and will be.giv- percent of industrial total production.
en greater latitude in deter- production.
mining the remainder.

Supply Only “scarce” producer Approximately 10 percent Over 4 percent of total. Wholesale trade re-
goods and supplies for:state -. of total industrial produc- _ industrial production op-. form to cover more
orders will continue to be: tion; 50 to 55 percent of crated under wholesale than 70 percent of ~
rationed by the state. Other ~ sales through state supply trade. sales through state
supplies will be distributed ” {7 networks.* supply networks by
through a wholesale trade 1992
system that will allow free
purchase and sale under di-
rect contracts between pro-
viders and users.

Wages Entire wage and salary No announced goal. 1988 No information. All industrial sectors
structure in the production . goal was 60 to 70 percent of .. by end of 1990.
sector will be overhauled, the work force. (May not be ‘
but increases are dependent expanded because of con-

cern that wages are being
finance them and are.tied to. - increased more than in-
increases in labor produc “creases in labor produc-
tion. = “2 Mtivity,) oe on
Banking Decentralizes bank deci- Codification of banking Limited decentraliza- fter:price reforms

practice through new bank-
ing legislation.

sionmaking somewhat-and
elevates the role of econom-
ic criteria in extending
credit.

 

tion. Some flexibility in
negotiating lending
rates. Assumed role of
liquidators in cases of
insolvency.

are.implemented.

 

Foreign trade

 

 

 

Allows selected enterprises. ~ Unannounced. ‘Was to be 26 percent of . No date given.
to engage directly in foreign all imports and 14 per-
trade and keep portion of cent of all exports. (im-
foreign currency earned. plementation behind
schedule.)
Footnotes appear at end of table
§ —Geeret-

BES! GSrY
AYETLA
Page-13
Soviet Economic Reform: A Status Report (continued)

 

 

“1988 Results.

 

  

 

Reform Major Purpose 1989 Goals
Wholesale Will be revised to better re Not scheduled to be ==. Not scheduled to be
prices flect resource scarcity and: “implemented. «implemented. * |: i
customer demands and will : os cations by I January
be based on contracts. 1990; construetion
and agriculture by 1
January 1991:
Retail prices Will be made more flexible None; to begin only after Not scheduled to be Whole economy, pre-
and more fully refiective of full public discussion and implemented: sumably including
supply and demand, proba- before 1991 (beginning of retail by 1991.
bly resulting in higher prices 5

for food, rent, and consumer
services.

* This goal was moved up to 1989 from 1990. In 1987, the stated
1989 goal was to be 30 percent of sales through state supply
networks operating on wholesale trade.

» This goal was slightly reduced. In 1987, the stated 1992 objective
was for wholesale trade to cover 80 percent of sales through state
supply networks.

Phirtebtes-Conidemtial

sense—encourages the critical reexamination of eco-
nomic history and the Stalinist system’s ideological
foundations and provides a new set of precepts that
support the devolution of economic and political pow-
er. (See inset, “Challenging Accepted Norms.”)

Slow Progress

Implementation of Gorbachev's program is off to a
rocky start. This is particularly true of his attempts to
reform the system of planning and management.
Ministries have not clearly apprised enterprise man-
agers of their new tasks and responsibilities. Detailed
instructions have not been issued, nor have chains of
command in new organizations been delineated clear-
ly. Enterprise managers remain reluctant to take risks
and to focus on quality and innovation because pres-
sure remains to meet quantitative targets set in the
extremely ambitious original five-year plan.

13th Five-Year Plan). ‘y

Loopholes in the reform legislation—the result of
compromise between those who wanted a radical
decentralization of economic decision making imme-
diately and those who preferred a more traditional,
cautious approach—have allowed the ministries and
the planning bureaucracy to resist change and have
postponed the advent of market forces:

+ For example, although obligatory plan targets cov-
ering an enterprise's entire range of output have
been replaced by a system of “nonbinding” control
figures and mandatory state orders, during the first
year of implementation, state orders levied by Gos-
plan and the ministries often took all of an enter-
prise’s output. In an effort to solve this problem,
ministries are prohibited from issuing state orders
during 1989, and Gosplan is instructed to reduce
state orders by one-half to two-thirds.
Page-14
Challenging Accepted Norms

Initiatives

Initiatives to make enterprises more fi-
nancially independent would inevitably re-
sult in the bankruptcy of inefficient firms.

Wage reform would tie rewards more
closely to individual production results
and would give greater rewards to Drofes-
sionals and skilled workers.

Retail price reform would reduce govern-
ment subsidies and bring supply and de-
mand more into line.

Wholesale price reform would allow
Prices to reflect changes in resource scar-
cities and consumer demand.

Expansion of the private sector to increase
the availability of consumer goods and
services would unleash private initiative.

Workplace democratization would allow
the workers to elect their managers and
workers councils, giving them a greater
stake in the collective's success.

The cooperative movement in agriculture
would give the farmer a personal interest
in using the land more efficiently by al-
lowing him to contract with the farm and
to pocket the profits.

Conflicts

This creates major uncertainties for workers, who face
unemployment andjor retraining, and for the manager, a
member of the privileged elite, who has typically spent his
entire career at the same plant.

This eliminates wage leveling and creates pressures to fire
redundant workers, thus conflicting with the social con-
tract.

While needed ultimately for long-term reform, it would
weaken the safety net that gives the poorest segment of the
population assured access to necessities such as food,
housing, and health care,

It would allow the market more influence over Soviet
economic activity, increasing the potential for its reputed
evils—inflation, unemployment, “unearned” profits, and
cyclical fluctuations.

It encourages qualities previously eschewed in the making
of the “new Soviet man''—self-interest, competition, and
“money-grubbing”’—while it chips away at state ownership
of the means of production.

Democratization violates the Lenin-ordained principle of
one-man plant management and gives the workers a greater
potential to challenge the role of the party in the economy.

It appears to be at variance with the raison d'etre for
collectivization—the submergence of the individual to the
group and a mechanism to transfer dividends from agricul-
ture to other sectors. :

 

 

Confidential
Page-15
+ Under the new conditions of “self-financing,” enter-
prises are to finance operating expenses and some
capital expenditures out of their own revenues and
bear the full economic responsibility for their ac-
tions. However, the amount of revenues they are
permitted to keep and the distribution of these
resources among investment and incentive funds
remain under the control of the ministries. As a
result, the ministries are able to juggle these ac-
counts and use the earnings of profitable enterprises
to bail out the unprofitable ones.

In the area of foreign trade, a “stage-by-stage”
convertibility of the ruble is planned, Starting with the
currencies of the countries belonging to the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance. Enterprises also are
being given broader rights to keep part of the foreign
exchange earned from exports. However, they still
need approval to participate directly in foreign eco-
nomic activity, and Soviet economists admit that
currency convertibility, even with the currencies of
Eastern Europe, is far off.

 

Finally, implementation of Gorbachev's program is
slow because only a portion of the economy has
changed to the new system, and crucial elements of
the reform package are not scheduled for full imple-
mentation until the beginning of the 13th Five-Year
Plan in 1991. Wholesale and retail price reform is
essential to make other reforms work, such as self-
financing and making the ruble more convertible into
both domestic goods and foreign currencies at realistic
tates. Yet, wholesale price reform in the state sector
will not be completed until 1991 and is likely to
consist of administrative revisions rather than changes
in the way prices are determined. Retail price reform
has been postponed indefinitely because the regime
fears that it will corrode the support of the populace
for perestroyka. Substantial new flexibility in setting
prices, as reformers originally intended, is not likely
because the Soviets have seen that granting limited
enterprise rights to set prices has been inflationary
under monopolistic conditions. (See inset, “Backtrack-
ing on Reform.”)

The modernization program has also been lagging and
seems to be getting a reduced level of attention. In
1987 there was no increase in the output of machinery
for the civilian sector, and the resulting shortfalls in

 

Backtracking on Reform

Some economic reforms, particularly those that
would negatively affect the consumer, have been
delayed or modified:

+ Retail price reform, which was to be imple-
mented in 1991 along with wholesale price
reform, has been pushed into the indefinite
Suture; even reform economists are expressing
skepticism about its wisdom.

Consumer goods remain tied to state orders in
order to ensure that unprofitable goods will
be produced, state orders have been reduced
substantially in other sectors.

A new set of price regulations on goods and
services produced in the cooperative sector are
in response to public complaints of price
gouging.

Decisions on wage increases, which were to be
the preserve of the enterprise, now are moni-
tored by Gosbank in order to ensure that they
do not exceed productivity gains and add to
inflationary pressures.

Wholesale price reform that will be imple-
mented beginning in 1990 is not the reform of
the price mechanism itself as envisioned in the
original reform decree, but another revision
that will periodically need adjusting.

 

 

 

equipment for investment caused problems through-
out industry and the rest of the economy. The high
targets that machine builders were tasked to achieve
were overwhelming, particularly in light of the fact
that they were being forced to do everything at once:
retool, increase quality, conserve resources, change
the product mix, and accelerate production. Despite
some performance improvement in 1988, the program
remains well below target.
Page-16
Figure 4

USSR: Economic Performance Under Gorbachev and His Predecessors

Average annual percent growth rates

Brezhnev

Gorbachev

 

 

ER Gnp
© industry
Agriculture

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

N

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

2

 

 

4

1965-70 1971-75 1976-82

71988 data are preliminary.

1983-84 1985-88 *

 

Unclassified

Gorbachev’s economic program has so far failed
consumers. Economic performance during 1985-88
was about the same as in 1976-82—the most stagnant
Brezhnev years when per capita income did not grow.
The effects of this poor performance—coupled with
reduced imports of consumer goods and the antialco-
hol campaign—mean that Soviet consumers probably
felt somewhat worse off at the end of 1987 than they
did in carly 1985 when Gorbachev assumed the post
of General Secretary. The Soviet consumer scene is
still marked by lengthy queues, rationing of some
goods, pervasive black-market activity, and shortages
of basic necessities, especially food.

319875 1268

Altering Economic Strategy

Because of these mounting problems, Gorbachev has
begun to alter his strategy in an attempt to revitalize
his economic program and prepare for the planning
decisions for the next five-year plan (1991-95). The
potential problems from disgruntled consumers forced
Gorbachev to alter his investment strategy to place
more emphasis on housing, food processing, and light
industry and to restrict growth in some other sectors.
The Soviets have directed the machine-building in-
dustry to give priority to sectors that directly serve the
consumer.
Page-17
Figure 5
USSR: Average Annual Growth of
Per Capita Consumption, 1956-87

Percent

1956-60 61-65 66-70 71-75 76-80 81-85 86-87

‘318678 1268

 

The defense industry is also being told to assume
responsibility for a greater share of consumer-related
production:

+ Premier Ryzhkov directed the defense industry to
increase deliveries of equipment to the food-process-
ing sector.

The Ministry of Machine Building for Light and
Foods Industry and Household Appliances was dis-
banded and most plants resubordinated to the de-
fense industry.

The 1989 plan calls on the defense industry to
improve the quality and increase production of
consumer goods and capital equipment for consum-
er-related industries.

The Minister of Medium Machine Building (the
most secretive defense-industrial ministry) an-
nounced plans to increase sharply the output of
equipment for the dairy industry.

.

Gorbachev is increasingly concentrating on expanding
the private and cooperative sectors and offering long-
term leasing arrangements in both agriculture and

 

industry because those initiatives hold the best pros-
pects for producing considerable improvements in the
quality of life over the next five years. Legislation that
would have levied a prohibitive tax structure on
cooperatives was remanded in July by the Supreme
Soviet in an unprecedented move.

Outlook

We believe that Gorbachev's efforts at reforming the
economy, fostering capital renewal, and motivating
labor and management will produce no substantial
improvement in the Soviet economy over the next five
years.’ His efforts to devote increasing resources and
attention to improving consumer welfare, however,
could achieve some modest results. Still, we believe
Gorbachev will be disappointed with the overall con-
sequences. Squeezing investment growth in noncon-
sumer sectors, including heavy industry, will jeopar-

‘dize prospects for meeting vital production targets.
This same strategy resulted in serious bottlenecks and
a substantial slippage in industrial growth during the
period 1976-80. Plans to increase investment in light
industry and to buy Western manufacturing equip-
ment face long-drawn-out retooling and installation
processes. Gorbachev's failure to deal with the al-
ready large budget deficit will intensify inflationary
pressures. (See annex B.)

Soviet attempts to incorporate new technologies and
create a more productive labor force will not be
enough to narrow the technology gap in most sectors
with the West during the remainder of this century.
More important, gains in particular areas will not be
self-perpetuating as long as incentives for dynamic
technological change remain weak. The Soviets have
undertaken a variety of measures to spur innovation
and the introduction of new technologies, including:
(1) raising prices for innovative products; (2) forming
associations to gather research, development, and
production responsibilities under one roof; (3) making

* The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that this
uneven performance could include sufficient improvement in the
Soviets" economic and technical base to facilitate fulfillment of
future military requirements.
Page-18
Figure 6
Moscow: Collective Farm Market Prices
of Selected Goods *

 

 

Rubles per kilogram __Note scale changes
Beef Pork Apples
—— State store price

10 10 4

 

 

 

 

 

 

87 0

80

 

1970 75 80 85 1970 75 85 87 0 197075 8 85 86 87
* Data are for purchases made in Moscow in August or
September of each year.
‘siseat 288

Unclassified

information more available as a result of glasnost; and
(4) encouraging joint ventures and technical ex-
changes with the more advanced countries. Neverthe-
less, systemic obstacles remain that discourage the
introduction and dispersion of new technologies at
industrial enterprises.‘ Recent reforms aim at creating
conditions and incentives for greater “technology
pull” from below and expanding the autonomy of
research and production collectives, but we believe
these first faltering steps will not produce substantial
results during the period covered by this Estimate.
Acquisition of technology aimed toward military uses
will not provide advances in Soviet industrial applica-
tions—the cornerstone of Soviet modernization. On
the other hand, the new proposed forms of cooperative
sharing of technology and managerial techniques with

* The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that, since the
Soviets already lead in several key defense technologies, they
should be able to continue assimilating technology gains in this
sector.

11

the West, particularly joint ventures, could allow for
easier transfer of technology than has been the case
with traditional purchases of machinery and equip-
ment.’

There may be some economic benefits from the
reform program that will help to prevent further
deterioration in the planned economy. For example,
financial pressures on enterprises should help reduce
redundant labor and some waste of materials. On
balance, however, we believe that such benefits will be
slow in coming and that they will be outweighed by
disruptions resulting from the conflicting and chang-
ing signals that piecemeal implementation of the
reform program will continue to create.

L
Page-19
We see no evidence that Gorbachev currently intends
to impose more radical reform in the state sector, a
strategy that would include:

+ Disengaging enterprises completely from ministerial
control and allowing them to respond to economic
levers.

* Providing much better price and profit signals by
allowing prices to fluctuate in response to supply
and demand.

+ Creating a more competitive environment by break-
ing up the present huge production conglomerates |
and permitting competition from abroad.

+ Introducing financial and capital markets.

Such moves toward a market economy at this time

would be even more disruptive to the planned econo-

my than piecemeal implementation and in particular
would jeopardize Gorbachev’s campaign to win popu-
lar support for his programs. We believe it most likely
that reforms for the state sector will continue to be
implemented slowly. Only a small number of unprofit-
able firms will be shut down, and price reform will

entail the periodic revision of prices rather than a

change in the basic pricing mechanism to allow more

flexibility. Nevertheless, Gorbachev has often reacted
to setbacks by proposing increasingly radical mea-
sures, and we cannot rule out an effort to move
rapidly toward a market economy in the state sector.

(See annex C.)

  

We believe Gorbachev will continue to push forward
on the moves already begun to expand private initia-
tive by paving the way for growth in the private and
cooperative sectors and by allowing long-term agricul-
tural leases. For such reforms to work, however,
Moscow must allow more flexibility and reliance on
the market. We believe progress in this area will be
difficult because a resentful public and skeptical local
authorities are likely to continue retarding the devel-
opment of the private sector. Furthermore, the lease
contracting system in agriculture will probably re-
main bound by centrally directed procurement targets
and state supplies of inputs as well as a recalcitrant
bureaucracy. Goods supplied by the private sector will
be costly, raising concerns over inflation. An added
problem for Moscow is that these reforms probably
will be most successful, at least initially, in non-
Russian areas such as the Baltic states and the
Caucasus.

We believe there will be escalating conflicts over
resources as the industrial modernization program
falls short, consumers continue to clamor for tangible
rewards, and the military perceives no reduction in its
needs. In the near term, the resource allocation debate
will be sharpest on investment. The present five-year
plan has no slack that would permit greater invest-
ment in priority sectors without offsetting adjust-
ments in other areas. The regime continues to balance
the books on the investment program by assuming
large gains in productivity in key areas such as
machine building, agriculture, industrial materials,
and construction. Yet, in his three-plus years in
power, Gorbachev has not made any progress in
reversing the long-term decline in productivity.

As a result, the leadership will have to tap resources
outside the civilian machinery-production sector to
continue the high investment strategy needed to re-
new the USSR’s capital stock and improve productivi-
ty over the long term. As a large claimant on some of
the economy’s most valuable and productive re-
sources, the defense industry is the prime, but not the
only, candidate that will be tasked to support Gorba-
chev’s industrial modernization drive. The defense
industry already produces civilian investment goods. -...
and is the main source of some high-technology
machinery and equipment such as robots, computers,
and advanced machine tools both for its own use and
for the civilian economy.

The defense industry has been given additional as-
signments to support the civilian sector and has been
told that these civil projects must be given priority,
even at the expense of some defense activities. We
judge Gorbachev will divert additional resources from
defense—including managers, equipment designers,
investment funds, and plant capacity—to his civilian
programs. The unilateral force reductions recently
announced by Gorbachev could pave the way for
cutbacks in weapons procurement in the near term,
which will release defense industry resources for
Gorbachev's civil economic agenda. While we recog-
nize there is some redundant defense plant capacity,
significant increases in the production of goods for the

12
Page-20
Figure 7
Estimated Distribution of Soviet GNP
by End Use

Percentage shares

Other government
expenditures *

   

Defense

Consumption
16 52

 

Investment
29

* Administration, other services, and civilian
research and development.

 

=
Unclassified heaiendat

civilian sector beyond the short term would require a
diversion of resources from the military. Some mem-
bers of the military have acknowledged that defense
must endure some pain under perestroyka to help the
economy and, hence, its own needs down the line.
Nevertheless, diversion of resources from defense to
civilian objectives will escalate conflicts over resource
allocation because it could delay upgrades to weapons
plants, thereby postponing the introduction of new
systems. Clearly there are strong economic pressures
for major reductions in military spending. The full
extent of these trade-offs will be based on an ongoing
decisionmaking and bureaucratic process that will
continue over the scope of the Estimate.

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, holds the
view that a critical distinction must be made in the
discussion of resource allocation trade-offs between
the resource requirements for short-term objectives
and those of long-range goals. Short-term require-
ments will rely primarily upon existing plant capacity
and inputs. The demands Gorbachev is making on the
defense sector do not require significant short-term
reallocations from defense to the civilian sector or the
disruption of current procurement programs. In the

longer term, to achieve lasting gains in productivity,
significant investment resources will be required. Re-
directing investment going to the defense industry
would not be sufficient to meet the economy’s mod-
ernization requirements since other sectors take far
greater shares of total investment. While slowing the
flow of investment resources into the defense sector
may well result in a downward turn in defense
spending trends, the Soviets probably would maintain
weapons programs that are key to force moderniza-
tion, while stretching some lower priority programs
and phasing out early some long-established weapons
production runs.

The accumulating economic problems and the chal-
lenges posed by the simultaneous pursuit of economic
and political reform will raise the level of contention
higher than it has been so far in Gorbachev’s tenure.
As a result of these tensions and continued struggles
over resource allocation, we believe there is some risk
for Gorbachev’s economic program. In the area of
economic reform in particular, disruptions—wide-
spread reform-related work stoppages or a drastic
drop in performance indicators—would strengthen
conservative opposition and convert to opponents
those who have been only lukewarm supporters of
reform. Such trends—coupled with the effects of
glasnost and continuing nationality turmoil—could
force the leadership into major retreat. If this should
happen, the more orthodox elements of Gorbachev's
program would survive, but the reforms designed to
bring about a major decentralization of economic
decision making would be shelved.

Implications for the West

On Arms Control

Gorbachev’s initiatives in the arms control arena have
been supported by development of “new thinking” in
the formulation of national security policy. Three
leading themes of this new policy are:

* The economic dimension of national security. Sovi-
et leaders have linked an improved economy to the
expansion of the USSR’s influence, and they have
Page-21
contended that the challenge posed by the arms
race to Moscow’s superpower status is as much
economic as it is military. They and the military
leadership agree that significant improvements in
the high-technology sector of the economy are
essential to compete with future Western weapon
systems.

The limits of military power. Gorbachev has tried
to promote a concept of “mutual security” that
attaches greater weight to political factors.

“Reasonable sufficiency.” Gorbachev and his fol-
lowers have characterized this concept as having
the necessary forces to deter aggression, and they
have indicated that the Soviets already have suffi-
cient power to do so. The Party Congress in Febru-
ary 1986, moreover, endorsed Gorbachev's call to
“restrict military power within the bounds of rea-
sonable sufficiency.”

In addition to trying to redefine Soviet national
security requirements, we believe Gorbachev has
moved arms control to the forefront of the USSR’s
national security agenda in an effort to dampen both
external and internal pressures to spend more on
defense, at least until he can reap the productivity
gains he hopes to achieve from his industrial modern-
ization program. With more than 150 Soviet Ground
Forces divisions, 160 Soviet Air Forces regiments, and
50 Soviet Air Defense Forces regiments west of the
Ural Mountains, any type of accommodation with
NATO that would allow the Soviets to reduce expen-
ditures on modernizing these forces has the potential
to result in substantial resource savings. The Soviet
leadership probably hopes that the process of arms
control negotiations will weaken NATO’s resolve to
modernize conventional and tactical nuclear weap-
ons—thus making possible cuts in their own defense
spending.

The unilateral force reductions recently announced by
Gorbachev could pave the way for cutbacks in weap-
ons procurement in the years ahead. The amount
saved will depend on the forces affected, the restruc-
turing of remaining forces to give them what Gorba-
chev described as a “clearly defensive” orientation,
the pace at which the reduced force is modernized,
and the costs of carrying out these initiatives.

A plausible long-term method of transferring re-
sources would be to redirect future investment from
defense industries into the civilian sector during the
next five-year plan (1991-95). As a result of the large-
scale modernization in the defense industries in the
1970s, the defense sector has already in place most of
the equipment it needs to produce weapon systems
scheduled for deployment through the early 1990s.
But the high-quality machine tools, equipment, and
raw materials required to retool the defense industry
to produce the next generation of weapons are the
same resources needed for Gorbachev's industrial
modernization program.

For Eastern Europe and Soviet Client States

Attempts at political reform in the USSR are likely to
generate pressure on East European countries for
similar reforms. Moscow will also increase its de-
mands on them for more and higher quality mach
ery and consumer goods and for greater participation
in joint projects—particularly those involving the
exploitation of Soviet natural resources. East Europe-
an countries will also be asked to shoulder more of the
costs of the Warsaw Pact defense effort. We believe
these countries—which are facing economic con-
straints and are anxious to do hard currency business
with the West—will be able to resist most of these
demands successfully.*

 

As to relations with client states, we expect increased
pressure from Moscow for those countries to adopt
reforms in order to reduce the burden of Soviet
support. While such support is only a limited drain on
resources, Gorbachev apparently believes that it is
inconsistent to continue support at past levels to
countries, such as Cuba and Vietnam, that are not
willing to adopt more flexible economic policies.

In Commercial Relations -

We do not foresee a large, sustained increase in Soviet
imports from the technologically advancéd capitalist
countries. Poor Soviet export prospects mean that
such an increase would have to be financed either by a

* For further details, see NIE 11/12-9-88 May
1988, Soviet Policy Toward Eastern Europe Under Gorbachev.
Page-22
substantial runup of debt, which Soviet officials insist

they will avoid, or by accelerated gold sales, which

could risk significant reduction in world gold prices.

In this regard, the situation facing Moscow in 1988 is

far different from the USSR’s position in the early-to-

middle 1970s, when the Soviets could easily manage a

substantial increase in their debt to the West:

+ Now Moscow must contend with stable or declining
oil prices and uncertainties over the quantity of oil
available for export.

+ Much of the debt incurred in the 1970s was formal-
ly tied to Western agreements to purchase Soviet
raw materials. This option is currently being used
more selectively.

Moreover, although the Soviets recognize the poten-
tial gains from increased use of Western technology
and equipment, they lack the confidence in the ability
of the economy—as currently configured—effectively
to absorb and ultimately to diffuse imported technol-
ogy on a large scale.

We cannot rule out a temporary sharp increase in
imports of consumer goods as a stopgap measure,
given the leadership's concern over the lack of popular
support for Gorbachev's programs. Even such an
increase would only restore Soviet spending on con-
sumer goods im. urts to pre-1985 levels. The Soviets
cut back substantially on imports of consumer goods
at that time in response to a large reduction in export
earnings. In recent months Western banks have been
negotiating credit lines with the Soviet Union worth
between $6 billion and $9 billion—largely tied to
Soviet purchases of machinery and equipment for the
production of consumer goods. In the past the Soviets
have arranged such lines and not used them fully, and
it is currently unclear to what extent they will use
these newly acquired credit lines. Unlike the mid-
1970s, when credit competition among Western gov-
ernments worked to the Soviets’ financial as well as
political advantage, the new credit lines do not offer
preferential financing, nor do they otherwise material-
ly broaden the potential base for Soviet borrowing.

A surge in borrowing from the West would not aid the
Soviet economy significantly or ameliorate the re-
source competition between the military and civilian

sectors. For example, even borrowing as much as
Western bankers would allow—perhaps $3-4 billion
net annually in addition to the roughly $5 billion
needed per year to refinance maturing debt—would
provide only a drop in the bucket for an economy that
produces roughly $2 trillion worth of goods and
services annually. We believe the Soviet leadership
will not undertake such borrowings for fear of the
economic leverage it would give Western governments
and bankers. Moreover, the Soviets recognize that
plans for any debt buildup can go awry should
Moscow unexpectedly confront lower oil prices, fur-
ther depreciation of the dollar, or two consecutive bad
harvests.

We expect to see an intensification of Soviet forejgn
economic initiatives, including increased concessions
to Western firms to conclude joint-venture agree-
ments, greater efforts to learn from Western business-
men, a stepped-up campaign for GATT. membership,
and the possible release of more trade and financial
data to facilitate improved borrowing terms. (See
annex D.) Under these conditions Soviet hard curren-
cy trade will continue to be dominated by Western
Europe and Japan. The Soviets also will push hard as
a top priority to improve economic relations with the
European Community.

The Soviets will continue to press for trade and
possibly financial concessions from the West. This
will lead to increased pressures for the West to pare
further the list of COCOM-controlled technologies.
Such pressure will make it more difficult for the West
to maintain a unified stance on current agreements—
or reach a new consensus—concerning trade and
financial flows to the Soviet Bloc.

For Western Leverage

Given the severity of Soviet economic problems, Gor-
bachev needs the many benefits of a nonconfronta-
tional international environment. This gives the Unit-
ed States and its allies considerable leverage in
bargaining with the Soviets over the terms of that
environment on some security issues such as regional
conflicts and arms control and on some internal
Page-23
matters such as human rights and information ex-
change. The margins of this leverage will be set by
Moscow’s determination not to let the West affect the
fundamental nature of the Soviet system or its super-
power status.”

* For a fuller discussion of these issues, see SNIE [ 1-16-88, Soviet
Policy During the Next Phase of Arms Control in Europe,
November 1988; NIE 11-3/8-88, Soviet Forces and Capabilities
Sor Strategic Nuclear Conflict Through the Late 1990s (Volume 1),
December 1988; and the forthcoming Estimates NIE 11-14-88,
Trends and Developments in Warsaw Pact Theater Forces and
Doctrine, 1988-2007; and NIE 11-4-89, Soviet Strategy Toward
the West: The Gorbachev Challenge.
Page-24
Annex A

 

The ‘‘Kosygin Reform”

As outlined by Kosygin, the 1965 reform program was
to include an administrative reorganization of the
bureaucracy, some decentralization of planning and
decisionmaking functions from the ministries to the
enterprises, a change in success criteria for enter-
prises, a revision of wholesale prices, and a reform of
the industrial supply system.

In comparison, Gorbachev's reform program is much
more comprehensive and integrated, encompassing
other key elements. For example, his price reform,
unlike previous efforts, is designed to encompass all’
forms of prices—wholesale, procurement, and retail—
and, in theory, is intended to change the basic pricing
mechanism.

The 1965 reforms were handicapped by major eco-
nomic flaws and inconsistencies. But they foundered
largely because of opposition from the government
bureaucracy, which reacted by procrastinating, as-
similating, complicating, and regulating. Implementa-
tion of the reform also suffered from a lack of strong

17

[Auvese blanks

leadership backing. Its initiator, Kosygin, became
increasingly overshadowed by Brezhnev, who lacked
his predecessor's commitment to reform. The climate
for a decentralization of decisionmaking became even
less favorable after the Czechoslovak “spring” of
1968, which underscored the political risks of reform.
Consequently, the reform was never implemented as
initially intended.
Page-25
Annex B
The Budget Deficit

 

The Soviet state budget deficit has increased dramati- Figure 8

cally during the last three years. We calculate the Pee Bi Defici

1989 deficit will be about 125 billion rubles—some 13 USSR: Estimated State Budget Deficit,1981-89
percent of Soviet GNP. (For comparison, the highest

US Government budget deficit represented 3.5 per- Percent of GNP

cent of US GNP in fiscal year 1986.) 15

The inflationary pressures resulting from Moscow’s
fiscal policy are already visible. Growth of wages 12

almost doubled in the first half of 1988. There has

been a marked increase in the prices of consumer <=
goods sold in collective farm markets, along with *
higher prices and increased shortages of consumer —
goods in state stores. Articles in the Soviet press have
complained loudly about enterprises inflating the
prices of new machinery products. Excess purchasing
power also has probably led to an expansion of the 3
underground economy, which results in resource di-

versions from the state sector and undermines at- Ec] [| [| [|
tempts to spur state worker productivity through 0 1981 82 83 84 8 86 87 88 89°
higher wages and salaries.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Projected.
Gorbachev's policies are partly responsible for the
deficit rise:
* State spending has risen rapidly asa result of large Unclassified 319880 12.8
boosts in state investment and increases in total
state subsidies on food and live ock products.
Receipts from stiff sales taxes on alcoholic bever-
ages are down substantially as a result of the
regime’s antialcohol program.
Revenues from the large markups imposed on the
retail prices of imported food and consumer goods
have fallen sharply as a result of the cutback in
these imports starting in 1986.
Proceeds from enterprise profit taxes grew slowly
last year because of production problems due to
retooling, reforms, and quality control measures.

 

19 —Geeret~

Cheverse blank]
Page-26
L feverse blank

 

 

Annex C

Soviet Economic Reform:
Signs of a Radical
Economic Shift

Indicators of forward movement toward radical, mar-
ket-oriented reform would include:

+ Less emphasis on the fulfillment of 1986-90 Five-
Year Plan targets and the announcement of realistic
1991-95 goals. The 1989 plan already has accepted
targets for produced national income and industrial
production that are lower than called for in the
current five-year plan.

Strong, united commitment by the leadership not
only to the general concept of economic restructur-
ing but also to individual elements of the reform
program that are particularly controversial, such as
essential price changes or even price reform.

Willingness to carry through particularly painful
adjustments such as bankruptcies that close down
many enterprises and wage reforms that lead to
wide differentials in pay.

21

+ Evidence of a large expansion in the number of
cooperatives (and employees of cooperatives) and the
playing down of resentment by the general populace
over egalitarian issues.

* Promulgation of major new agricultural reforms
that reduce the powers of the state and collective
farms. 1

+ Greater consolidation of economic ministries, ac-
companied by cuts in staff and revision of their
charters to steer them away from supervising the
day;to-day activities of economic enterprises.

+ Continued ability of reform economists to publish
controversial articles that push the limits of reform.
Page-27
C Reverse blank J

 

 

Annex D

Update on Joint Ventures

Moscow has signed 41 joint-venture contracts with
Western firms in 1988, bringing the total to 61 since
legislation governing such contracts took effect in
January 1987. Nevertheless, Soviet leaders are dis-
couraged by the low level of investment and technol-
ogy in most of these deals and are considering chang-
ing the program to encourage more Western
participation. Such changes might spur additional
contracts, but primarily from firms interested in
small-scale projects.

Moscow’s relative success in negotiating joint ven-
tures is largely the result of greater Soviet flexibility,
particularly in easing restrictions on the repatriation
of profits, the biggest obstacle to concluding agree-
ments. The original legislation allowed Western firms
to earn hard currency profits only by exporting fin-
ished products of the joint enterprise. Moscow is now
allowing an array of options, including countertrade
agreements in which the Western partners export
Soviet goods to earn hard currency. In one agreement,
the Soviets reportedly will also allow a consortium of
six US firms to repatriate profits by pooling their hard
currency earnings.

23

Despite the surge in agreements, the Soviet leadership
is far from satisfied with the progress of its joint-
venture program. Service and consumer-related proj-
ects, rather than high-technology deals, still dominate
the list of completed contracts.
Page-28
® «= Seeret’”
Page-29
’

 

@)

Director of Secret.

Central
Intelligence

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1999

‘Gorbachev's Economic

Programs: The
Challenges Ahead

National Intelligence Estimate

This National Intelligence Estimate represents
the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the

US Intelligence Community.

—Seeret

NIE 11-23-88
December 1988

Corr 27%
Page-30
Warning Notice Intelligence Sourc

   
  
  

 

National Se Unauthorized Disclosure
Subject to Criminal Sanctions

 

 

 

 

Dissemination Control NOFORN (NF) Not releasable to foreign nationals 2

Abbreviations NOCONTRACT (NG) Not releasable to contractors or contractor/consuljaes
PROPIN (PR) Caution—proprietary information involyad~ °
ORCON (OC) Dissemination and extractignoPtiformation

   
 

 

 

 

  
   
  

controlled by
REL... This inforefation has been authorized for release to...
: WN _——WNINTEL— Intelligence sources or methods involved
A microfiche copy ofskeocu- Classified by 622649
ment is availableTrom OIR/ ——_Declassify: OADR
DLBIAB7-7177k printed copies Derived from multiple sources

m CPAS/IMC (482-5203: or
AIM request to userid
CPASIMC).

  

All matey
is Unetassi
Page-31
Director of
Central
Intelligence

NIE 11-23-88

Gorbachev's Economic
Programs: The
Challenges Ahead

Information available as of 20 December 1988 was used
in the preparation of this National Intelligence Estimate.

The following intelligence organizations participated
in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense Intelligence Agency

The National Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

The Office of Intelligence Support,

Department of the Treasury

also participating:

The Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff

for Intelligence, Department of the Army

The Office of the Director of Naval

Intelligence, Department of the Navy

The Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff,

Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Intelligence, Department of Energy

The Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps

This Estimate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board.

—Seeret

December 1988
Page-32
Key Judgments

We believe that Gorbachev’s efforts at reviving the Soviet economy will
produce no substantial improvement over the next five years, although his
efforts to raise consumer welfare could achieve some modest results. Soviet
attempts to raise technology levels will not narrow the gap with the West in
most sectors during the remainder of this century.'

Gorbachev’s economic program has so far failed consumers, who, accord-
ing to anecdotal evidence, probably feel somewhat worse off now than they
did when Gorbachev assumed power in 1985. To improve consumer
welfare, Gorbachev has begun to place more emphasis on housing, food
processing, and light industry; and the defense industry is being told to
increase its production for consumers. Gorbachev has also sought to expand
the private and cooperative sectors through long-term leasing arrange-
ments in both agriculture and industry. These initiatives are the ones that
are most likely to improve the quality of life in the Soviet Union over the
next five years.

Gorbachev’s effort to reform the country’s system of planning and
management and to improve the country’s capital stock is going poorly. Ill-
defined reform legislation, interference by ministries, and piecemeal
implementation are creating disruptions and preventing progress. Reforms
already planned in the state sector will probably be implemented slowly.
Sharp moves toward a market economy would be very disruptive and would
jeopardize popular support for his programs. Nevertheless, Gorbachev has
often dealt with setbacks by adopting radical measures, and we cannot rule
out an effort to move rapidly toward a market economy in the state sector.

To promote growth of private enterprise, Moscow must allow more
flexibility and reliance on the market for leasing and cooperative arrange-
ments in order to increase significantly the production of goods and
services for consumers. A resentful public and skeptical bureaucracy will
make this difficult. Lease contracting in agriculture will remain bound by
centrally directed procurement targets, reliance on state supplies, and a

' The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that this uneven performance could
include sufficient improvement in the Soviets’ economic and technical base to facilitate
fulfillment of future military requirements. Moreover, since the Soviets already lead in
several key defense technologies, they should be able to continue assimilating technology
gains in this sector.

at —Secret-
NE 11-23-68

 

Up.ik blankj
Page-33
recalcitrant bureaucracy. The comparatively high prices of privately
supplied goods will spur inflation. An added problem for Moscow is that
these reforms probably will be most successful, at least initially, in non-
Russian areas such as the Baltic states and the Caucasus.

We do not foresee a large, sustained increase in Soviet imports from the
West. The Soviets may increase borrowing to perhaps $3-4 billion net per
year over the next few years. Even a much larger surge in borrowing from
the West, which we think is unlikely, would not aid the overall economy
substantially or ameliorate the resource competition between the military
and civilian sectors. A few industries may benefit, however.

We judge Gorbachev will divert additional resources from defense—
including managers, equipment designers, investment funds, and plant
capacity—to his civilian programs. While we recognize there is some
redundant defense plant capacity, significant increases in the production of
goods for the civilian sector would require a diversion of resources from the
military. Diversion from defense to civilian objectives will escalate conflicts
over resource allocation because it could delay upgrades to weapons plants,
thereby postponing the introduction of new systems. Clearly there are
strong economic pressures for major reductions in military spending.
Striking the right balance will involve many leadership arguments and
decisions over the entire period of this Estimate. In any case, the large-
scale modernization of Soviet defense industries in the 1970s has already
put in place most of the equipment needed to produce weapon systems
scheduled for deployment through the early 1990s.?

Moscow will press harder on Eastern Europe for more and higher quality
machinery and consumer goods, for greater participation in joint projects,
and for greater contributions to Warsaw Pact defense. Such demands will
produce only marginal benefits for the USSR-because of real economic
constraints in Eastern Europe and the reluctance of its regimes to increase
their help to the Soviets.

There is some chance that Gorbachev’s economic programs may not
survive. Disruptions, such as widespread reform-related work stoppages or.
a drastic drop in performance indicators, might strengthen conservative
Opposition. Such trends, coupled with continuing nationality turmoil, could
force the leadership into a major retreat.

* The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, holds an alternative view that a critical
distinction must be made between near-term resource allocation trade-offs that can be
made without significantly disrupting current defense procurement, and those of the longer
term where a downward turn in defense spending trends may result in reordering or
Stretching out of weapons procurement.
Page-34
Given the severity of Soviet economic problems, Gorbachev needs the
many benefits of a nonconfrontational international environment. This
gives the United States and its allies considerable leverage in bargaining
with the Soviets over the terms of that environment on some security issues
such as regional conflicts and arms control and on some internal matters
such as human rights and information exchange. The margins of this
leverage will be set by Moscow’s determination not to let the West affect
the fundamental nature of the Soviet system or its superpower status.’

” For a fuller discussion of these issues, see SNIE 11-16-88, Soviet Policy During the Next
Phase of Arms Control in Europe, November 1988; NIE 11-3/8-88, Soviet Forces and
Capabilities for Strategic Nuclear Conftict Through the Late 1990s (Volume 1), December
1988; and the forthcoming Estimates NIE 11-14-88, Trends and Developments in Warsaw
Pact Theater Forces and Doctrine, 1988-2007; and NIE 11-4-89, Soviet Strategy Toward
the West: The Gorbachev Challenge.

CAeverse. blank3
Page-35
Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page
Key Judgments iii
Discussion 1
The Need for Change 1
A Bold Action Plan 2
Clearing the Political Track 3
Slow Progress 6
Altering Economic Strategy 9
Outlook 10
Implications for the West 13
On Arms Control 13
For Eastern Europe and Soviet Client States 14
In Commercial Relations 14
For Western Leverage 15
Annex A. The “‘Kosygin Reform” 17
Annex B. The Budget Deficit 19
Annex C. Soviet Economic Reform: Signs of a Radical 21
Economic Shift
Annex D. Update on Joint Ventures 23

 

 

Mo —Sesret
Page-36
Discussion:

The Need for Change

A simple growth formula—ever increasing inputs of
labor and capital—resulted in rapid economic gains
for the Soviet Union in the postwar era. This postwar
system placed heavy stress on quantity rather than
quality. Because there was an abundance of low-cost,
readily available resources, there was little concern
for efficiency and productivity. As the USSR moved
out of the reconstruction phase in the 1960s, this
growth formula became less effective. Labor supply .
growth slowed, ever larger expenditures were required
to exploit natural resources, and the inefficiencies
inherent in central planning became more acute as the
economy grew.

Military spending also has increasingly hindered eco-
nomic performance. To support the military effort,
Moscow created an institutional mechanism reaching
from the highest state bodies down through layers of
administrative control to individual enterprises, thus
ensuring priority to defense programs. As a result of
this priority, the defense sector’s share of national
output grew and by the mid-1980s consumed 15 to 17
percent of GNP. The incentive structure—wages,
bonuses, perquisites—was designed to favor those who
worked in or supported the defense industry. The
defense sector was given priority access to raw materi-
als, machinery and cquipment, subcomponents, scien-
tists, engineers, and skilled workers, preempting con-
sumption and investment in the civilian sector. The

“General Secretary Gorbachev's efforts at reforming the political
and economic fabric of the Soviet Union have been under way for
more than three years. This Estimate reviews the progress of his
economic strategy, identifies the conflicts inherent in his approach,
and assesses the outlook for reform over the next five years. The
Soviet leader has set in motion a dynamic process whose outcome
cannot be predicted with confidence. There will continue to be
major alterations in the game plan, and a conservative reaction to
the strains unleashed by the current effort is possible. What is clear
is that the very fabric of Soviet ideology and institutions is being
questioned more than at any time since the revolution, and in the
Soviet Union there is a general consensus that retreating to the
economic and nolitical path existing when Gorbachev took over is
not tenable,

Soviet defense industry became the most technologi-
cally advanced and most effective sector of the econo-
my. This effectiveness was due primarily to the
priority that created the institutional mechanism
rather than greater efficiency. The defense industry
has been at least as inefficient and wasteful as the
civilian sector.

As a result of these factors, GNP growth slowed from
rates that were closing the economic and technologi,
cal gaps with the developed West during the 1950s‘
and 1960s to a range in the 1980s that allowed little
expansion of per capita output and stymied progress
in narrowing the technology gap. The large and still
growing burden of defense coupled with increasing
demands for investment in areas such as energy and
agriculture allowed no room for major increases in the
quantity and quality of consumer goods and services.

Brezhnev’s successors, then, were saddled with:
+ An antiquated industrial base and a defense sector
that was siphoning off high-quality resources need-

ed for economic improvement.

An energy sector beset by rapidly rising production
costs of oil, its major fuel.

Levels of technology that, for most areas, substan-
tially lagged those of the West. .

Inefficiencies inherent in the conflict between ever
more central planning and control and an increas-
ingly large and complex’ economy.

An inefficient farm sector that, despite large invest-
ments, still employed 20 percent of the Soviet labor
force compared with only 5 percent in the United
States.
Page-37
Figure |
USSR: Low Living Standards

Soviet consumption as a percentage
of US consumption, 1983

Total consumption

Durables

 

Figure 2
USSR: Lags in Key Technologies

Approximate length of US lead in years

   
 
 

  

Minicomputers

  

Mainframes

 
  
   

  

   
  

 

Household services Supercomputers

Health Microelectronics

Soft goods Numerically controlled !
machine tools

Food Flexible manufacturing
systems

Education Robots

Unclassified 319876 1288 Unclassified 319877 12.68

+ A hidebound, corrupt bureaucracy and inflexible
planning system that failed to provide the proper
signals for production and investment, retarded
scientific-technical innovation, and encouraged high
costs and massive waste of resources.

A Bold Action Plan

Gorbachev recognized the “pre-crisis” urgency of
these problems and initiated a bold strategy to deal
with them. He grouped his efforts to revive the
economy under the broad rubric of perestroyka, a
term that includes three major economic elements—
lighter economic discipline, industrial modernization,
and economic reform. The goal of these actions, we
believe, is to develop an economic environment capa-
ble of:

+ At least containing, if not narrowing, the growing
gaps in technology and economic performance with
the West, thereby also enabling Moscow to main-
lain its military competitiveness.

 

* Achieving major improvements in consumer welfare
to gain the cooperation and support of the masses
for perestroyka and to maintain regime legitimacy.

Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders recognize that

reaching these economic goals will take years, possi-

bly decades, and that progress toward them could be
greatly facilitated by a more nonconfrontational inter-
national environment. Gorbachev's efforts in arms
control, his political initiatives, and the campaign to
refurbish the USSR’s image are intended ‘to achieve
such an environment.

+

When Gorbachev first assumed office, he concentrat-

ed on extending and intensifying Andropov's disci-

pline campaign. His “human factors” initiatives —
discipline, temperance, and improved work incen-
tives—were intended to raise labor productivity and
to increase economic growth for the first two or three
years of the 1986-90 Five-Year Plan while industry
retooled. He also removed many inept and corrupt
managers and officials and attempted to rationalize
Page-38
ss

Figure 3
USSR: Per Capita Consumption in a
Global Perspective, 1985

Index: US=100

United States
France

West Germany
United Kingdom
Italy

Japan

Hungary

USSR

South Korea

1319879 1288

Unclassified

the organizational structure of the bureaucracy by
trimming slots and rearranging and combining func-
tions.

Gorbachev argued that industrial modernization was
the key to long-lasting improvement of the USSR’s
economic situation. His program was aimed at the
massive introduction of new machinery and the rapid
retirement of old equipment. This depended heavily
on major improvements in the machine-building and
metalworking sector that manufactures producer and
consumer durables and military hardware. (See inset,
“Machine Building—The Focus of Gorbachev's Mod-
ernization Plans.”)

Gorbachev's boldest proposals were focused on eco-
nomic reform of planning and management. These
changes—contained in the Basic Provisions for Fun-
damentally Reorganizing Economic Management, the

 

Law on the State Enterprise, and 11 decrees—were
approved at the Central Committee plenum in June
1987. This set of documents, together with decrees
adopted over the last three years that expanded the
role of the private sector, represents a design for the
most comprehensive reform of economic management
in the Soviet Union since the introduction of Stalinist
central planning in the late 1920s. The plan goes well
beyond the “Kosygin” reforms adopted in 1965 (see
annex A). The reform package is scheduled to be
“almost fully” in place by the beginning of 1991—the
first year of the 13th Five-Year Plan—and major
parts of the package are already in effect. (See the
table on pages 5 and 6.)

Clearing the Political Track

Gorbachev also proposed reforms of the political
system in part because of the ability of the entrenched
state and party bureaucracies to defeat past efforts at
economic reform. He aims to decentralize the Political
system to circumvent the resistance to reform at the
top and middle levels of the leadership—groups that
have forced him to compromise and slow implementa-
tion of his programs. The reforms place more deci-
sionmaking authority at the local level in hopes of
making the system more responsive to local economic
signals than to administrative dictates from the top.
His program for “democratization” is designed to
produce a more participatory political culture—en-
couraging local officials to take initiative to resolve
problems and giving the populace a greater say in
decisions.

At Gorbachev's initiative, measures were approved by
the national party conference in June 1988 to reduce
the size of the party apparatus, force local party chiefs
to stand for election as head of the'regional soviets,
and give the soviets new authority. These measures
aim at diminishing the ability of local party chiefs to
block controversial reforms and sensitizing local lead-
ers to popular sentiment on such economic issues as
more and better food and consumer goods. Glas-
nost—an element of political reform in the broadest
Page-39
Machine Building—The Focus of Gorbachev's
Modernization Plans

Gorbachev has argued that the key to long-lasting
improvement of the USSR’s economic situation is
the continuous introduction of increasingly pro-
ductive machinery and equipment. The moderniza-
tion program, therefore, depends heavily on im-
provements in machine building and metal-
working—the sector that produces these producer
durables, as well as consumer durables and mili-
tary hardware. The ambitious targets of the 1986-
90 plan reflect the sector's importance:

* Output is to increase by 43 percent during the
period 1986-90.

Targets for high-technology equipment are even
higher. Planned growth rates are especially high
for numerically controlled machine tools (125
percent), robots (225 percent), and processing
centers (330 percent).

Quality and technological levels are to improve
dramatically. By 1990, 85 to 90 percent of the
most important types of machinery output will
be up to “world technical levels,” compared with
13 to 15 percent for civilian machinery in 1986.
New machinery is to be at least 50 to 100 percent
more productive and reliable than previously
produced equipment.

New machinery is to be introduced more quickly
than in the past—by 1990, 13 percent of
machine-building output is to be in its first year
of production, up from 3 percent in 1985.

By 1990, 60 percent of the sector's own machin-
ery is to be new—that is, brought on line during
the preceding five years. To reach this goal,

investment in civil machine-building ministries is

to rise by 80 percent. Meanwhile, the withdraw-
al rate for old capital goods is to double by
1990, while the withdrawal rate for machinery
is to quadruple.

Machine building's struggle to meet these goals
was hindered, in part, by the quality control
program and new financial arrangements intro-
duced in 1987:

+ Production of numerically controlled machine
tools showed no growth in 1987, and production
of industrial robots declined.

* While newly introduced machines represent
about 9 percent of output, the Soviets admit toa
general lack of progress in meeting “world
standards.”

+ The pace of both investment and machinery
retirements has slowed markedly from the plan
guidelines.

Though machine builders will not reach their 12th
Five-Year Plan targets, the leadership has taken
Steps to revitalize modernization by refocusing
resources on priority areas including machinery
Sor consumers, the food program, transportation,
and construction. At the same time, the plan calls
for an intensification of the development of ma-
chine tool building, instrument building, electron-
ics, and electrical equipment—the same industries
targeted for preferential development in the origi-
nal 12th Five-Year Plan goals.
Page-40
Soviet Economic Reform::A

  

 

 

 

      
  

  

 

 

 

  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

Reform

Enterprise Wags -of- industry and ©

self-financing lity for; apfiagriculture; “hope” to com-

ceaplete ‘changeover of nonpro
Investment will be: finan eduction sphere to same
less through: budget allo
tions and more. thi
terprise’s own resources and:
- bank credits. ae

Regional/ Republics and local govern: /8:;Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Not yet introduced. Expansion ‘to.un-

local self- ments will have greater role .*:“Belorussia, Moscow a ° named regions. *

financing in forming their-own bud- Tatar ASSR, and Sverd-
gets and will be expected to, lovsk Oblast (RSFSR).
balance revenues and expen-
ditures. Revenues will be
formed from taxes levied on
enterprises within the region
or locale to fund social/
economic development. :

Planning Enterprises will produce a. -All enterprises and associa- State orders made up 86 | State orders are to
portion of their output in tions. State orders are to percent of industrial “eventually” drop to
compliance with mandatory make up an estimated 40 production. 20 to 25 percent of
state orders and will be.giv- percent of industrial total production.
en greater latitude in deter- production.
mining the remainder.

Supply Only “scarce” producer Approximately 10 percent Over 4 percent of total. Wholesale trade re-
goods and supplies for:state -. of total industrial produc- _ industrial production op-. form to cover more
orders will continue to be: tion; 50 to 55 percent of crated under wholesale than 70 percent of ~
rationed by the state. Other ~ sales through state supply trade. sales through state
supplies will be distributed ” {7 networks.* supply networks by
through a wholesale trade 1992
system that will allow free
purchase and sale under di-
rect contracts between pro-
viders and users.

Wages Entire wage and salary No announced goal. 1988 No information. All industrial sectors
structure in the production . goal was 60 to 70 percent of .. by end of 1990.
sector will be overhauled, the work force. (May not be ‘
but increases are dependent expanded because of con-

cern that wages are being
finance them and are.tied to. - increased more than in-
increases in labor produc “creases in labor produc-
tion. = “2 Mtivity,) oe on
Banking Decentralizes bank deci- Codification of banking Limited decentraliza- fter:price reforms

practice through new bank-
ing legislation.

sionmaking somewhat-and
elevates the role of econom-
ic criteria in extending
credit.

 

tion. Some flexibility in
negotiating lending
rates. Assumed role of
liquidators in cases of
insolvency.

are.implemented.

 

Foreign trade

 

 

 

Allows selected enterprises. ~ Unannounced. ‘Was to be 26 percent of . No date given.
to engage directly in foreign all imports and 14 per-
trade and keep portion of cent of all exports. (im-
foreign currency earned. plementation behind
schedule.)
Footnotes appear at end of table
§ —Geeret-

BES! GSrY
AYETLA
Page-41
Soviet Economic Reform: A Status Report (continued)

 

 

“1988 Results.

 

  

 

Reform Major Purpose 1989 Goals
Wholesale Will be revised to better re Not scheduled to be ==. Not scheduled to be
prices flect resource scarcity and: “implemented. «implemented. * |: i
customer demands and will : os cations by I January
be based on contracts. 1990; construetion
and agriculture by 1
January 1991:
Retail prices Will be made more flexible None; to begin only after Not scheduled to be Whole economy, pre-
and more fully refiective of full public discussion and implemented: sumably including
supply and demand, proba- before 1991 (beginning of retail by 1991.
bly resulting in higher prices 5

for food, rent, and consumer
services.

* This goal was moved up to 1989 from 1990. In 1987, the stated
1989 goal was to be 30 percent of sales through state supply
networks operating on wholesale trade.

» This goal was slightly reduced. In 1987, the stated 1992 objective
was for wholesale trade to cover 80 percent of sales through state
supply networks.

Phirtebtes-Conidemtial

sense—encourages the critical reexamination of eco-
nomic history and the Stalinist system’s ideological
foundations and provides a new set of precepts that
support the devolution of economic and political pow-
er. (See inset, “Challenging Accepted Norms.”)

Slow Progress

Implementation of Gorbachev's program is off to a
rocky start. This is particularly true of his attempts to
reform the system of planning and management.
Ministries have not clearly apprised enterprise man-
agers of their new tasks and responsibilities. Detailed
instructions have not been issued, nor have chains of
command in new organizations been delineated clear-
ly. Enterprise managers remain reluctant to take risks
and to focus on quality and innovation because pres-
sure remains to meet quantitative targets set in the
extremely ambitious original five-year plan.

13th Five-Year Plan). ‘y

Loopholes in the reform legislation—the result of
compromise between those who wanted a radical
decentralization of economic decision making imme-
diately and those who preferred a more traditional,
cautious approach—have allowed the ministries and
the planning bureaucracy to resist change and have
postponed the advent of market forces:

+ For example, although obligatory plan targets cov-
ering an enterprise's entire range of output have
been replaced by a system of “nonbinding” control
figures and mandatory state orders, during the first
year of implementation, state orders levied by Gos-
plan and the ministries often took all of an enter-
prise’s output. In an effort to solve this problem,
ministries are prohibited from issuing state orders
during 1989, and Gosplan is instructed to reduce
state orders by one-half to two-thirds.
Page-42
Challenging Accepted Norms

Initiatives

Initiatives to make enterprises more fi-
nancially independent would inevitably re-
sult in the bankruptcy of inefficient firms.

Wage reform would tie rewards more
closely to individual production results
and would give greater rewards to Drofes-
sionals and skilled workers.

Retail price reform would reduce govern-
ment subsidies and bring supply and de-
mand more into line.

Wholesale price reform would allow
Prices to reflect changes in resource scar-
cities and consumer demand.

Expansion of the private sector to increase
the availability of consumer goods and
services would unleash private initiative.

Workplace democratization would allow
the workers to elect their managers and
workers councils, giving them a greater
stake in the collective's success.

The cooperative movement in agriculture
would give the farmer a personal interest
in using the land more efficiently by al-
lowing him to contract with the farm and
to pocket the profits.

Conflicts

This creates major uncertainties for workers, who face
unemployment andjor retraining, and for the manager, a
member of the privileged elite, who has typically spent his
entire career at the same plant.

This eliminates wage leveling and creates pressures to fire
redundant workers, thus conflicting with the social con-
tract.

While needed ultimately for long-term reform, it would
weaken the safety net that gives the poorest segment of the
population assured access to necessities such as food,
housing, and health care,

It would allow the market more influence over Soviet
economic activity, increasing the potential for its reputed
evils—inflation, unemployment, “unearned” profits, and
cyclical fluctuations.

It encourages qualities previously eschewed in the making
of the “new Soviet man''—self-interest, competition, and
“money-grubbing”’—while it chips away at state ownership
of the means of production.

Democratization violates the Lenin-ordained principle of
one-man plant management and gives the workers a greater
potential to challenge the role of the party in the economy.

It appears to be at variance with the raison d'etre for
collectivization—the submergence of the individual to the
group and a mechanism to transfer dividends from agricul-
ture to other sectors. :

 

 

Confidential
Page-43
+ Under the new conditions of “self-financing,” enter-
prises are to finance operating expenses and some
capital expenditures out of their own revenues and
bear the full economic responsibility for their ac-
tions. However, the amount of revenues they are
permitted to keep and the distribution of these
resources among investment and incentive funds
remain under the control of the ministries. As a
result, the ministries are able to juggle these ac-
counts and use the earnings of profitable enterprises
to bail out the unprofitable ones.

In the area of foreign trade, a “stage-by-stage”
convertibility of the ruble is planned, Starting with the
currencies of the countries belonging to the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance. Enterprises also are
being given broader rights to keep part of the foreign
exchange earned from exports. However, they still
need approval to participate directly in foreign eco-
nomic activity, and Soviet economists admit that
currency convertibility, even with the currencies of
Eastern Europe, is far off.

 

Finally, implementation of Gorbachev's program is
slow because only a portion of the economy has
changed to the new system, and crucial elements of
the reform package are not scheduled for full imple-
mentation until the beginning of the 13th Five-Year
Plan in 1991. Wholesale and retail price reform is
essential to make other reforms work, such as self-
financing and making the ruble more convertible into
both domestic goods and foreign currencies at realistic
tates. Yet, wholesale price reform in the state sector
will not be completed until 1991 and is likely to
consist of administrative revisions rather than changes
in the way prices are determined. Retail price reform
has been postponed indefinitely because the regime
fears that it will corrode the support of the populace
for perestroyka. Substantial new flexibility in setting
prices, as reformers originally intended, is not likely
because the Soviets have seen that granting limited
enterprise rights to set prices has been inflationary
under monopolistic conditions. (See inset, “Backtrack-
ing on Reform.”)

The modernization program has also been lagging and
seems to be getting a reduced level of attention. In
1987 there was no increase in the output of machinery
for the civilian sector, and the resulting shortfalls in

 

Backtracking on Reform

Some economic reforms, particularly those that
would negatively affect the consumer, have been
delayed or modified:

+ Retail price reform, which was to be imple-
mented in 1991 along with wholesale price
reform, has been pushed into the indefinite
Suture; even reform economists are expressing
skepticism about its wisdom.

Consumer goods remain tied to state orders in
order to ensure that unprofitable goods will
be produced, state orders have been reduced
substantially in other sectors.

A new set of price regulations on goods and
services produced in the cooperative sector are
in response to public complaints of price
gouging.

Decisions on wage increases, which were to be
the preserve of the enterprise, now are moni-
tored by Gosbank in order to ensure that they
do not exceed productivity gains and add to
inflationary pressures.

Wholesale price reform that will be imple-
mented beginning in 1990 is not the reform of
the price mechanism itself as envisioned in the
original reform decree, but another revision
that will periodically need adjusting.

 

 

 

equipment for investment caused problems through-
out industry and the rest of the economy. The high
targets that machine builders were tasked to achieve
were overwhelming, particularly in light of the fact
that they were being forced to do everything at once:
retool, increase quality, conserve resources, change
the product mix, and accelerate production. Despite
some performance improvement in 1988, the program
remains well below target.
Page-44
Figure 4

USSR: Economic Performance Under Gorbachev and His Predecessors

Average annual percent growth rates

Brezhnev

Gorbachev

 

 

ER Gnp
© industry
Agriculture

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

N

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

2

 

 

4

1965-70 1971-75 1976-82

71988 data are preliminary.

1983-84 1985-88 *

 

Unclassified

Gorbachev’s economic program has so far failed
consumers. Economic performance during 1985-88
was about the same as in 1976-82—the most stagnant
Brezhnev years when per capita income did not grow.
The effects of this poor performance—coupled with
reduced imports of consumer goods and the antialco-
hol campaign—mean that Soviet consumers probably
felt somewhat worse off at the end of 1987 than they
did in carly 1985 when Gorbachev assumed the post
of General Secretary. The Soviet consumer scene is
still marked by lengthy queues, rationing of some
goods, pervasive black-market activity, and shortages
of basic necessities, especially food.

319875 1268

Altering Economic Strategy

Because of these mounting problems, Gorbachev has
begun to alter his strategy in an attempt to revitalize
his economic program and prepare for the planning
decisions for the next five-year plan (1991-95). The
potential problems from disgruntled consumers forced
Gorbachev to alter his investment strategy to place
more emphasis on housing, food processing, and light
industry and to restrict growth in some other sectors.
The Soviets have directed the machine-building in-
dustry to give priority to sectors that directly serve the
consumer.
Page-45
Figure 5
USSR: Average Annual Growth of
Per Capita Consumption, 1956-87

Percent

1956-60 61-65 66-70 71-75 76-80 81-85 86-87

‘318678 1268

 

The defense industry is also being told to assume
responsibility for a greater share of consumer-related
production:

+ Premier Ryzhkov directed the defense industry to
increase deliveries of equipment to the food-process-
ing sector.

The Ministry of Machine Building for Light and
Foods Industry and Household Appliances was dis-
banded and most plants resubordinated to the de-
fense industry.

The 1989 plan calls on the defense industry to
improve the quality and increase production of
consumer goods and capital equipment for consum-
er-related industries.

The Minister of Medium Machine Building (the
most secretive defense-industrial ministry) an-
nounced plans to increase sharply the output of
equipment for the dairy industry.

.

Gorbachev is increasingly concentrating on expanding
the private and cooperative sectors and offering long-
term leasing arrangements in both agriculture and

 

industry because those initiatives hold the best pros-
pects for producing considerable improvements in the
quality of life over the next five years. Legislation that
would have levied a prohibitive tax structure on
cooperatives was remanded in July by the Supreme
Soviet in an unprecedented move.

Outlook

We believe that Gorbachev's efforts at reforming the
economy, fostering capital renewal, and motivating
labor and management will produce no substantial
improvement in the Soviet economy over the next five
years.’ His efforts to devote increasing resources and
attention to improving consumer welfare, however,
could achieve some modest results. Still, we believe
Gorbachev will be disappointed with the overall con-
sequences. Squeezing investment growth in noncon-
sumer sectors, including heavy industry, will jeopar-

‘dize prospects for meeting vital production targets.
This same strategy resulted in serious bottlenecks and
a substantial slippage in industrial growth during the
period 1976-80. Plans to increase investment in light
industry and to buy Western manufacturing equip-
ment face long-drawn-out retooling and installation
processes. Gorbachev's failure to deal with the al-
ready large budget deficit will intensify inflationary
pressures. (See annex B.)

Soviet attempts to incorporate new technologies and
create a more productive labor force will not be
enough to narrow the technology gap in most sectors
with the West during the remainder of this century.
More important, gains in particular areas will not be
self-perpetuating as long as incentives for dynamic
technological change remain weak. The Soviets have
undertaken a variety of measures to spur innovation
and the introduction of new technologies, including:
(1) raising prices for innovative products; (2) forming
associations to gather research, development, and
production responsibilities under one roof; (3) making

* The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that this
uneven performance could include sufficient improvement in the
Soviets" economic and technical base to facilitate fulfillment of
future military requirements.
Page-46
Figure 6
Moscow: Collective Farm Market Prices
of Selected Goods *

 

 

Rubles per kilogram __Note scale changes
Beef Pork Apples
—— State store price

10 10 4

 

 

 

 

 

 

87 0

80

 

1970 75 80 85 1970 75 85 87 0 197075 8 85 86 87
* Data are for purchases made in Moscow in August or
September of each year.
‘siseat 288

Unclassified

information more available as a result of glasnost; and
(4) encouraging joint ventures and technical ex-
changes with the more advanced countries. Neverthe-
less, systemic obstacles remain that discourage the
introduction and dispersion of new technologies at
industrial enterprises.‘ Recent reforms aim at creating
conditions and incentives for greater “technology
pull” from below and expanding the autonomy of
research and production collectives, but we believe
these first faltering steps will not produce substantial
results during the period covered by this Estimate.
Acquisition of technology aimed toward military uses
will not provide advances in Soviet industrial applica-
tions—the cornerstone of Soviet modernization. On
the other hand, the new proposed forms of cooperative
sharing of technology and managerial techniques with

* The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that, since the
Soviets already lead in several key defense technologies, they
should be able to continue assimilating technology gains in this
sector.

11

the West, particularly joint ventures, could allow for
easier transfer of technology than has been the case
with traditional purchases of machinery and equip-
ment.’

There may be some economic benefits from the
reform program that will help to prevent further
deterioration in the planned economy. For example,
financial pressures on enterprises should help reduce
redundant labor and some waste of materials. On
balance, however, we believe that such benefits will be
slow in coming and that they will be outweighed by
disruptions resulting from the conflicting and chang-
ing signals that piecemeal implementation of the
reform program will continue to create.

L
Page-47
We see no evidence that Gorbachev currently intends
to impose more radical reform in the state sector, a
strategy that would include:

+ Disengaging enterprises completely from ministerial
control and allowing them to respond to economic
levers.

* Providing much better price and profit signals by
allowing prices to fluctuate in response to supply
and demand.

+ Creating a more competitive environment by break-
ing up the present huge production conglomerates |
and permitting competition from abroad.

+ Introducing financial and capital markets.

Such moves toward a market economy at this time

would be even more disruptive to the planned econo-

my than piecemeal implementation and in particular
would jeopardize Gorbachev’s campaign to win popu-
lar support for his programs. We believe it most likely
that reforms for the state sector will continue to be
implemented slowly. Only a small number of unprofit-
able firms will be shut down, and price reform will

entail the periodic revision of prices rather than a

change in the basic pricing mechanism to allow more

flexibility. Nevertheless, Gorbachev has often reacted
to setbacks by proposing increasingly radical mea-
sures, and we cannot rule out an effort to move
rapidly toward a market economy in the state sector.

(See annex C.)

  

We believe Gorbachev will continue to push forward
on the moves already begun to expand private initia-
tive by paving the way for growth in the private and
cooperative sectors and by allowing long-term agricul-
tural leases. For such reforms to work, however,
Moscow must allow more flexibility and reliance on
the market. We believe progress in this area will be
difficult because a resentful public and skeptical local
authorities are likely to continue retarding the devel-
opment of the private sector. Furthermore, the lease
contracting system in agriculture will probably re-
main bound by centrally directed procurement targets
and state supplies of inputs as well as a recalcitrant
bureaucracy. Goods supplied by the private sector will
be costly, raising concerns over inflation. An added
problem for Moscow is that these reforms probably
will be most successful, at least initially, in non-
Russian areas such as the Baltic states and the
Caucasus.

We believe there will be escalating conflicts over
resources as the industrial modernization program
falls short, consumers continue to clamor for tangible
rewards, and the military perceives no reduction in its
needs. In the near term, the resource allocation debate
will be sharpest on investment. The present five-year
plan has no slack that would permit greater invest-
ment in priority sectors without offsetting adjust-
ments in other areas. The regime continues to balance
the books on the investment program by assuming
large gains in productivity in key areas such as
machine building, agriculture, industrial materials,
and construction. Yet, in his three-plus years in
power, Gorbachev has not made any progress in
reversing the long-term decline in productivity.

As a result, the leadership will have to tap resources
outside the civilian machinery-production sector to
continue the high investment strategy needed to re-
new the USSR’s capital stock and improve productivi-
ty over the long term. As a large claimant on some of
the economy’s most valuable and productive re-
sources, the defense industry is the prime, but not the
only, candidate that will be tasked to support Gorba-
chev’s industrial modernization drive. The defense
industry already produces civilian investment goods. -...
and is the main source of some high-technology
machinery and equipment such as robots, computers,
and advanced machine tools both for its own use and
for the civilian economy.

The defense industry has been given additional as-
signments to support the civilian sector and has been
told that these civil projects must be given priority,
even at the expense of some defense activities. We
judge Gorbachev will divert additional resources from
defense—including managers, equipment designers,
investment funds, and plant capacity—to his civilian
programs. The unilateral force reductions recently
announced by Gorbachev could pave the way for
cutbacks in weapons procurement in the near term,
which will release defense industry resources for
Gorbachev's civil economic agenda. While we recog-
nize there is some redundant defense plant capacity,
significant increases in the production of goods for the

12
Page-48
Figure 7
Estimated Distribution of Soviet GNP
by End Use

Percentage shares

Other government
expenditures *

   

Defense

Consumption
16 52

 

Investment
29

* Administration, other services, and civilian
research and development.

 

=
Unclassified heaiendat

civilian sector beyond the short term would require a
diversion of resources from the military. Some mem-
bers of the military have acknowledged that defense
must endure some pain under perestroyka to help the
economy and, hence, its own needs down the line.
Nevertheless, diversion of resources from defense to
civilian objectives will escalate conflicts over resource
allocation because it could delay upgrades to weapons
plants, thereby postponing the introduction of new
systems. Clearly there are strong economic pressures
for major reductions in military spending. The full
extent of these trade-offs will be based on an ongoing
decisionmaking and bureaucratic process that will
continue over the scope of the Estimate.

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, holds the
view that a critical distinction must be made in the
discussion of resource allocation trade-offs between
the resource requirements for short-term objectives
and those of long-range goals. Short-term require-
ments will rely primarily upon existing plant capacity
and inputs. The demands Gorbachev is making on the
defense sector do not require significant short-term
reallocations from defense to the civilian sector or the
disruption of current procurement programs. In the

longer term, to achieve lasting gains in productivity,
significant investment resources will be required. Re-
directing investment going to the defense industry
would not be sufficient to meet the economy’s mod-
ernization requirements since other sectors take far
greater shares of total investment. While slowing the
flow of investment resources into the defense sector
may well result in a downward turn in defense
spending trends, the Soviets probably would maintain
weapons programs that are key to force moderniza-
tion, while stretching some lower priority programs
and phasing out early some long-established weapons
production runs.

The accumulating economic problems and the chal-
lenges posed by the simultaneous pursuit of economic
and political reform will raise the level of contention
higher than it has been so far in Gorbachev’s tenure.
As a result of these tensions and continued struggles
over resource allocation, we believe there is some risk
for Gorbachev’s economic program. In the area of
economic reform in particular, disruptions—wide-
spread reform-related work stoppages or a drastic
drop in performance indicators—would strengthen
conservative opposition and convert to opponents
those who have been only lukewarm supporters of
reform. Such trends—coupled with the effects of
glasnost and continuing nationality turmoil—could
force the leadership into major retreat. If this should
happen, the more orthodox elements of Gorbachev's
program would survive, but the reforms designed to
bring about a major decentralization of economic
decision making would be shelved.

Implications for the West

On Arms Control

Gorbachev’s initiatives in the arms control arena have
been supported by development of “new thinking” in
the formulation of national security policy. Three
leading themes of this new policy are:

* The economic dimension of national security. Sovi-
et leaders have linked an improved economy to the
expansion of the USSR’s influence, and they have
Page-49
contended that the challenge posed by the arms
race to Moscow’s superpower status is as much
economic as it is military. They and the military
leadership agree that significant improvements in
the high-technology sector of the economy are
essential to compete with future Western weapon
systems.

The limits of military power. Gorbachev has tried
to promote a concept of “mutual security” that
attaches greater weight to political factors.

“Reasonable sufficiency.” Gorbachev and his fol-
lowers have characterized this concept as having
the necessary forces to deter aggression, and they
have indicated that the Soviets already have suffi-
cient power to do so. The Party Congress in Febru-
ary 1986, moreover, endorsed Gorbachev's call to
“restrict military power within the bounds of rea-
sonable sufficiency.”

In addition to trying to redefine Soviet national
security requirements, we believe Gorbachev has
moved arms control to the forefront of the USSR’s
national security agenda in an effort to dampen both
external and internal pressures to spend more on
defense, at least until he can reap the productivity
gains he hopes to achieve from his industrial modern-
ization program. With more than 150 Soviet Ground
Forces divisions, 160 Soviet Air Forces regiments, and
50 Soviet Air Defense Forces regiments west of the
Ural Mountains, any type of accommodation with
NATO that would allow the Soviets to reduce expen-
ditures on modernizing these forces has the potential
to result in substantial resource savings. The Soviet
leadership probably hopes that the process of arms
control negotiations will weaken NATO’s resolve to
modernize conventional and tactical nuclear weap-
ons—thus making possible cuts in their own defense
spending.

The unilateral force reductions recently announced by
Gorbachev could pave the way for cutbacks in weap-
ons procurement in the years ahead. The amount
saved will depend on the forces affected, the restruc-
turing of remaining forces to give them what Gorba-
chev described as a “clearly defensive” orientation,
the pace at which the reduced force is modernized,
and the costs of carrying out these initiatives.

A plausible long-term method of transferring re-
sources would be to redirect future investment from
defense industries into the civilian sector during the
next five-year plan (1991-95). As a result of the large-
scale modernization in the defense industries in the
1970s, the defense sector has already in place most of
the equipment it needs to produce weapon systems
scheduled for deployment through the early 1990s.
But the high-quality machine tools, equipment, and
raw materials required to retool the defense industry
to produce the next generation of weapons are the
same resources needed for Gorbachev's industrial
modernization program.

For Eastern Europe and Soviet Client States

Attempts at political reform in the USSR are likely to
generate pressure on East European countries for
similar reforms. Moscow will also increase its de-
mands on them for more and higher quality mach
ery and consumer goods and for greater participation
in joint projects—particularly those involving the
exploitation of Soviet natural resources. East Europe-
an countries will also be asked to shoulder more of the
costs of the Warsaw Pact defense effort. We believe
these countries—which are facing economic con-
straints and are anxious to do hard currency business
with the West—will be able to resist most of these
demands successfully.*

 

As to relations with client states, we expect increased
pressure from Moscow for those countries to adopt
reforms in order to reduce the burden of Soviet
support. While such support is only a limited drain on
resources, Gorbachev apparently believes that it is
inconsistent to continue support at past levels to
countries, such as Cuba and Vietnam, that are not
willing to adopt more flexible economic policies.

In Commercial Relations -

We do not foresee a large, sustained increase in Soviet
imports from the technologically advancéd capitalist
countries. Poor Soviet export prospects mean that
such an increase would have to be financed either by a

* For further details, see NIE 11/12-9-88 May
1988, Soviet Policy Toward Eastern Europe Under Gorbachev.
Page-50
substantial runup of debt, which Soviet officials insist

they will avoid, or by accelerated gold sales, which

could risk significant reduction in world gold prices.

In this regard, the situation facing Moscow in 1988 is

far different from the USSR’s position in the early-to-

middle 1970s, when the Soviets could easily manage a

substantial increase in their debt to the West:

+ Now Moscow must contend with stable or declining
oil prices and uncertainties over the quantity of oil
available for export.

+ Much of the debt incurred in the 1970s was formal-
ly tied to Western agreements to purchase Soviet
raw materials. This option is currently being used
more selectively.

Moreover, although the Soviets recognize the poten-
tial gains from increased use of Western technology
and equipment, they lack the confidence in the ability
of the economy—as currently configured—effectively
to absorb and ultimately to diffuse imported technol-
ogy on a large scale.

We cannot rule out a temporary sharp increase in
imports of consumer goods as a stopgap measure,
given the leadership's concern over the lack of popular
support for Gorbachev's programs. Even such an
increase would only restore Soviet spending on con-
sumer goods im. urts to pre-1985 levels. The Soviets
cut back substantially on imports of consumer goods
at that time in response to a large reduction in export
earnings. In recent months Western banks have been
negotiating credit lines with the Soviet Union worth
between $6 billion and $9 billion—largely tied to
Soviet purchases of machinery and equipment for the
production of consumer goods. In the past the Soviets
have arranged such lines and not used them fully, and
it is currently unclear to what extent they will use
these newly acquired credit lines. Unlike the mid-
1970s, when credit competition among Western gov-
ernments worked to the Soviets’ financial as well as
political advantage, the new credit lines do not offer
preferential financing, nor do they otherwise material-
ly broaden the potential base for Soviet borrowing.

A surge in borrowing from the West would not aid the
Soviet economy significantly or ameliorate the re-
source competition between the military and civilian

sectors. For example, even borrowing as much as
Western bankers would allow—perhaps $3-4 billion
net annually in addition to the roughly $5 billion
needed per year to refinance maturing debt—would
provide only a drop in the bucket for an economy that
produces roughly $2 trillion worth of goods and
services annually. We believe the Soviet leadership
will not undertake such borrowings for fear of the
economic leverage it would give Western governments
and bankers. Moreover, the Soviets recognize that
plans for any debt buildup can go awry should
Moscow unexpectedly confront lower oil prices, fur-
ther depreciation of the dollar, or two consecutive bad
harvests.

We expect to see an intensification of Soviet forejgn
economic initiatives, including increased concessions
to Western firms to conclude joint-venture agree-
ments, greater efforts to learn from Western business-
men, a stepped-up campaign for GATT. membership,
and the possible release of more trade and financial
data to facilitate improved borrowing terms. (See
annex D.) Under these conditions Soviet hard curren-
cy trade will continue to be dominated by Western
Europe and Japan. The Soviets also will push hard as
a top priority to improve economic relations with the
European Community.

The Soviets will continue to press for trade and
possibly financial concessions from the West. This
will lead to increased pressures for the West to pare
further the list of COCOM-controlled technologies.
Such pressure will make it more difficult for the West
to maintain a unified stance on current agreements—
or reach a new consensus—concerning trade and
financial flows to the Soviet Bloc.

For Western Leverage

Given the severity of Soviet economic problems, Gor-
bachev needs the many benefits of a nonconfronta-
tional international environment. This gives the Unit-
ed States and its allies considerable leverage in
bargaining with the Soviets over the terms of that
environment on some security issues such as regional
conflicts and arms control and on some internal
Page-51
matters such as human rights and information ex-
change. The margins of this leverage will be set by
Moscow’s determination not to let the West affect the
fundamental nature of the Soviet system or its super-
power status.”

* For a fuller discussion of these issues, see SNIE [ 1-16-88, Soviet
Policy During the Next Phase of Arms Control in Europe,
November 1988; NIE 11-3/8-88, Soviet Forces and Capabilities
Sor Strategic Nuclear Conflict Through the Late 1990s (Volume 1),
December 1988; and the forthcoming Estimates NIE 11-14-88,
Trends and Developments in Warsaw Pact Theater Forces and
Doctrine, 1988-2007; and NIE 11-4-89, Soviet Strategy Toward
the West: The Gorbachev Challenge.
Page-52
Annex A

 

The ‘‘Kosygin Reform”

As outlined by Kosygin, the 1965 reform program was
to include an administrative reorganization of the
bureaucracy, some decentralization of planning and
decisionmaking functions from the ministries to the
enterprises, a change in success criteria for enter-
prises, a revision of wholesale prices, and a reform of
the industrial supply system.

In comparison, Gorbachev's reform program is much
more comprehensive and integrated, encompassing
other key elements. For example, his price reform,
unlike previous efforts, is designed to encompass all’
forms of prices—wholesale, procurement, and retail—
and, in theory, is intended to change the basic pricing
mechanism.

The 1965 reforms were handicapped by major eco-
nomic flaws and inconsistencies. But they foundered
largely because of opposition from the government
bureaucracy, which reacted by procrastinating, as-
similating, complicating, and regulating. Implementa-
tion of the reform also suffered from a lack of strong

17

[Auvese blanks

leadership backing. Its initiator, Kosygin, became
increasingly overshadowed by Brezhnev, who lacked
his predecessor's commitment to reform. The climate
for a decentralization of decisionmaking became even
less favorable after the Czechoslovak “spring” of
1968, which underscored the political risks of reform.
Consequently, the reform was never implemented as
initially intended.
Page-53
Annex B
The Budget Deficit

 

The Soviet state budget deficit has increased dramati- Figure 8

cally during the last three years. We calculate the Pee Bi Defici

1989 deficit will be about 125 billion rubles—some 13 USSR: Estimated State Budget Deficit,1981-89
percent of Soviet GNP. (For comparison, the highest

US Government budget deficit represented 3.5 per- Percent of GNP

cent of US GNP in fiscal year 1986.) 15

The inflationary pressures resulting from Moscow’s
fiscal policy are already visible. Growth of wages 12

almost doubled in the first half of 1988. There has

been a marked increase in the prices of consumer <=
goods sold in collective farm markets, along with *
higher prices and increased shortages of consumer —
goods in state stores. Articles in the Soviet press have
complained loudly about enterprises inflating the
prices of new machinery products. Excess purchasing
power also has probably led to an expansion of the 3
underground economy, which results in resource di-

versions from the state sector and undermines at- Ec] [| [| [|
tempts to spur state worker productivity through 0 1981 82 83 84 8 86 87 88 89°
higher wages and salaries.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Projected.
Gorbachev's policies are partly responsible for the
deficit rise:
* State spending has risen rapidly asa result of large Unclassified 319880 12.8
boosts in state investment and increases in total
state subsidies on food and live ock products.
Receipts from stiff sales taxes on alcoholic bever-
ages are down substantially as a result of the
regime’s antialcohol program.
Revenues from the large markups imposed on the
retail prices of imported food and consumer goods
have fallen sharply as a result of the cutback in
these imports starting in 1986.
Proceeds from enterprise profit taxes grew slowly
last year because of production problems due to
retooling, reforms, and quality control measures.

 

19 —Geeret~

Cheverse blank]
Page-54
L feverse blank

 

 

Annex C

Soviet Economic Reform:
Signs of a Radical
Economic Shift

Indicators of forward movement toward radical, mar-
ket-oriented reform would include:

+ Less emphasis on the fulfillment of 1986-90 Five-
Year Plan targets and the announcement of realistic
1991-95 goals. The 1989 plan already has accepted
targets for produced national income and industrial
production that are lower than called for in the
current five-year plan.

Strong, united commitment by the leadership not
only to the general concept of economic restructur-
ing but also to individual elements of the reform
program that are particularly controversial, such as
essential price changes or even price reform.

Willingness to carry through particularly painful
adjustments such as bankruptcies that close down
many enterprises and wage reforms that lead to
wide differentials in pay.

21

+ Evidence of a large expansion in the number of
cooperatives (and employees of cooperatives) and the
playing down of resentment by the general populace
over egalitarian issues.

* Promulgation of major new agricultural reforms
that reduce the powers of the state and collective
farms. 1

+ Greater consolidation of economic ministries, ac-
companied by cuts in staff and revision of their
charters to steer them away from supervising the
day;to-day activities of economic enterprises.

+ Continued ability of reform economists to publish
controversial articles that push the limits of reform.
Page-55
C Reverse blank J

 

 

Annex D

Update on Joint Ventures

Moscow has signed 41 joint-venture contracts with
Western firms in 1988, bringing the total to 61 since
legislation governing such contracts took effect in
January 1987. Nevertheless, Soviet leaders are dis-
couraged by the low level of investment and technol-
ogy in most of these deals and are considering chang-
ing the program to encourage more Western
participation. Such changes might spur additional
contracts, but primarily from firms interested in
small-scale projects.

Moscow’s relative success in negotiating joint ven-
tures is largely the result of greater Soviet flexibility,
particularly in easing restrictions on the repatriation
of profits, the biggest obstacle to concluding agree-
ments. The original legislation allowed Western firms
to earn hard currency profits only by exporting fin-
ished products of the joint enterprise. Moscow is now
allowing an array of options, including countertrade
agreements in which the Western partners export
Soviet goods to earn hard currency. In one agreement,
the Soviets reportedly will also allow a consortium of
six US firms to repatriate profits by pooling their hard
currency earnings.

23

Despite the surge in agreements, the Soviet leadership
is far from satisfied with the progress of its joint-
venture program. Service and consumer-related proj-
ects, rather than high-technology deals, still dominate
the list of completed contracts.
Page-1
TOP

4
CLEA L oS :

CA HISTORICAL REVIEW: PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE GROUP

REVISED SOVIET TACTICS
_ IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

ORE 1/1
6 January 1947

  

COPY NO.

 

290004 ©
Page-2
Same
ORE 1/1 7

6 January 1947 copy xo. 31

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE GROUP

REVISED SOVIET TACTICS
IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Indications of a Change in Soviet Tactics

1. The USSR has apparently decided that for the time being more

subtle tactics should be employed in implementing its basic foreign

and military policy (see ORE 1, dated 23 July 1946). Recent develop-

ments indicating this decision include:

a. Soviet concessions on the Trieste issue.

b. Soviet acceptance of the principle of free navigation on

the Danube.

c. Soviet agreement in principle to international inspection
of armaments and to eliminate the veto in the work of the contem-

plated atomic and disarmament commissions. ,

d. Indications of substantial reductions in Soviet occupa-

tion forces.

baijan.

f. Agreement of the Security Council to investigate respons-

ibility for disorders on the Greek frontier.

g. Relaxation from former extreme position, of interpreting

abstention as a veto to meaning not an expression of a veto.

h. Agreement to have Foreign Ministers’ Deputies meet in

London before the forthcoming Moscow Conference to draw up draft

treaty for Austria and Germany.

Considerations Conducive Toward a Change in Tactics

2. There are a number of. considerations, both international and
domestic, which appear to have convinced the Kremlin of the desirabil-

ity of a temporary change of course:

“e. Failure of the USSR to render effective support to Azer-
Page-3
POPS BECRET OO

3. International considerations in estimated order of importance
include:

a&. The firm policy of the Western Powers, especially the US;
the realization that a further expansion of Soviet control in Eu-
rope cannot be accomplished by force without risk of war; and the
desire to placate the US and the UK in order to encourage a relax-
ation of Western vigilance, to strengthen the hand of Western ad-
vocates of a conciliatory policy toward the USSR, and to obtain
economic aid from the West for sorely needed. rehabilitation.

b. The benefits to the USSR from a reduction in its occupa-
tion forces. With effective control over Soviet-dominated areas
in Europe established to the maximum extent possible at present,
the USSR can afford to reduce its present excessive occupation
forces, especially in view of the increased mechanization of the
remaining troops. A reduction in occupation forces would have

the following benefits:

(1) Release of additional manpower sorely needed for the
Soviet internal economy.

(2) Reduction of antagonism throughout the world.

(3) Alleviation of a major cause of popular hostility
toward the Communist Parties in occupied areas where local
elements have been disillusioned and alienated by ruthless
Soviet reparations policies, the conduct of Soviet troops
and the burden of subsisting these troops.

(4) A basis for attempting to induce further reductions
of occupation forces by the Western Powers. The USSR will
undoubtedly use any drastic reduction in its occupation forces
to support a campaign of diplomacy and propaganda to secure
further reductions in the occupation forces of the Western
Powers. Proportionate reductions by all of the Allied Powers
would have the net effect of strengthening the Soviet Union's
relative position on the Continent. Once the occupation
forces of the US and the UK have been reduced, there is small
chance that they could be readily increased again. The USSR,
on the other hand, is ina position to move troops into and
out of the areas under its control with relative ease and
secrecy. It is likewise ina position to conceal the pres-
ence of its troops abroad by infiltrating them into satel-
lite armies and police forces, and by settling them as
"civilians" in occupied areas, ready for mobilization on
short notice.
Page-4
CRESECRET

c¢. The USSR's need of support at international gatherings
from the smaller nations outside the Soviet bloc which have re-
cently been aligning themselves with Anglo-American positions in

opposition to arbitrary Soviet tactics.

d. Net advantages to the USSR of general disarmament among
the major powers.. The realization of a general disarmament pro-
gram would result in a decided relative advantage to the Soviet
Union. Whereas the Western Powers derive their military strength
from extensive navies, strategic air forces and intricate modern
weapons, that of the USSR is still essentially based on mass land
armies. Once reduced, therefore, the war potential of the West
would require years to restore, while that of the USSR would be
substantially restored merely by the re-mobilizing of manpower.

4. Domestic factors which would have equal weight in producing
a temporary change in Soviet tactics are:

a. Internal economic conditions. The condition of Soviet
agriculture is undoubtedly serious, with critical shortages in
some vital foods, while certain basic industries are failing to
meet the quotas prescribed by the Fourth Five-Year Plan.- As a
result, the Kremlin may have been forced to revise its estimate
of the proportions of the national economy which could be di-
verted to military purposes, because the immediate needs of the
USSR, particularly the devastated areas, have exceeded what it
was reasonable to plan for industry to produce.

b. Civilian morale. There are increasing signs of apathy,
and even unrest, among the Soviet populace. Shortages in food,
housing, and consumer goods have created widespread dissatisfac-
tion. The vigorous campaign of "ideological cleansing" indicates
the concern with which the Kremlin views the situation.
¢. Morale among former occupation troops. The occupation
has furnished a large number of Soviet citizens with their first
opportunity to view the outside world. The "bourgeois fleshpots"
of Germany, Austria, and the Balkans have produced disillusion-
ment, a reluctance to return to the USSR, and a substantial num-
ber of desertions.* Demobilized occupation troops are spreading
the infection throughout the USSR, which is probably an important
‘element in current domestic dissatisfaction, The large-scale

7 The Department of State considers this sentence too strong because
it implies that these conditions are rather prevalent. C.1.G. and
the War and Navy Departments, however, consider that these condi-
tions are indeed prevalent.
Page-5
oeeseereT —

occupation has thus constituted a breach in the barriers which
guard the Soviet people from foreign ideology and information,
and which are so essential to the maintenance of the Kremlin's
control.

Probable Future Tactics

5. In view of the foregoing considerations, Soviet leaders must
have decided upon a temporary breathing space for the purpose of eco-
nomic and ideological rehabilitation at hame and the consolidation of
positions abroad. We believe, however, that the Kremlin has not aban-
doned any of its long-range objectives described in ORE 1, but that
these objectives will now be pursued where expedient by methods more
subtle than those of recent months. ‘Such methods will include:

a. Continued efforts to gain political and economic control
of Germany, Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Korea, by cer-
tain characteristically Soviet techniques, which would not neces-
sitate the presence of large Soviet military forces. Such tech-
niques consist of the "popular front", or coalition, political
strategy, under which relatively weak Communist parties merge
with and gain control of leftist and liberal organizations; in-
filtration, by Moscow agents or local Communists, into key gov-
ernment positions, especially police, judicial, military, prop-
aganda, and educational agencies; the "liquidation" by local
Communist parties of all native elements which might be expected
to oppose the Soviet program; and the stripping or expropriation
of key industrial plants and the establishment of elaborate car-
tel systems, giving the USSR control of vital industry.

b. Intensification of militant Communist activity in Euro-
pean areas outside of the present Soviet sphere, aimed at produc-
ing Communist or Communist-controlled governments by legal or
revolutionary means in such countries as France, Italy, Spain,
and Greece. .

¢. Political and economic penetration in the Middle East,
Far East, and Latin América.

d. Elaborate campaigns of propaganda and diplomacy designed
to convince the world of the USSR's peaceful intentions, and to
promote disarmament and pacifism abroad.

e-. An intensive long-range program to develop the war poten-
tial of the USSR, concentrating especially on the expansion of
basic industries, on the secret development of new weapons, on
the acquisition of information on secret military developments
in other countries, and on reducing the vulnerability of Soviet
industry to attack by atom bombs, rockets, etc.
Page-6
£. Promotion of discord and unrest in the capitalist coun-
tries, especially by seizing any Opportunities offered by per-
iodic economic crises and unemployment, which the Soviets con-
fidently predict for the near future.

Conclusions

6. Recent developments have confirmed previous estimates that
"the USSR did not intend and was not in a position to engage in imme-
diate military conquests. Its ultimate action will depend upon future
developments in the Soviet Union and in the outside world. Meanwhile,
the USSR is seeking to consolidate its positions abroad and to improve
its economic and psychological position at home, while encouraging dis-
armament and pacifism in the rest of the world.

7. Soviet tactics, however, will remain flexible and opportunis-
tic. The Kremlin has never relied exclusively on any single line of
action. Rather, its tactics are based on the inter-pley of two appar-
ently conflicting courses, international collaboration and unilateral
aggression, and on its ability suddenly to shift from one to the other.
This technique seeks to achieve maximum surprise for each new move,
and to promote such confusion and uncertainty among the opposition as
to prevent the development of any long-range counter-strategy. Thus,
in view of the considerations described in the preceding pages, new
tactics of compromise and conciliation have been adopted merely as a
matter of expediency. They will be employed only in those situations
where they are deemed to further Soviet foreign and military policy
as described in ORE 1.