
Page-1
NIE 82-86

GUATEMALA: PROSPECTS FOR
THE NEW GOVERNMENT

Information available a3 of 90 January 1986 was used
in the preparation of this Eximate, which was
approved by the National Foreign Intelligence Board
on 13 February 1986,

)

sla APPROWED i
Aporoved far Release

Date aves i9a9

MAR

 

1988
Page-2
SE
NoronyoCOnTAcr/ORCOM

 
  
  
 
   

 

CONTENTS

Page

SCOPE NOTE.........0... 1
KEY JUDGMENTS 00. cscssscssststntntntstsnstststntsssssatisseeee 3
DISCUSSION ....ssesssssststststsintnitssusstisniitteiussuseesee, 7
The Economy... 8
Civilian Military Relations. ll
The Insurgency... i 13

  

Foreign Policy
Implications for the United States.
Page-3
SECRET
NOFORN/! TRACT/ORCON

SCOPE NOTE

The recent inauguration of President Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo in
Guatemala has brought to power the first civilian leader of the country
in almost two decades. The new President is faced with serious
economic problems, a delicate political relationship with the armed
forces, a persistent leftist insurgency, and continuing political violence.
In the foreign policy area, Cerezo has given early indications that he
will take an active role in regional affairs, as well as expand Guatemala’s
international ties in an effort to attract greater foreign aid. This
Estimate will address the prospects for the new government over the
next year or so, beginning with internal economic, political, and
military problems and then examining how its foreign policies are likely
to evolve. It will also discuss the implications to the United States of var-
ious alternative outlooks. (onty” :
Page-4
worompsocGuranc T/ORCON

KEY JUDGMENTS

The inauguration of President Vinicio Cerezo and the installation
of a new civilian government is a decisive step toward the US goal of a
stable democratic system in Guatemala, but continued Progress toward
that goal is far from assured. Cerezo will need all the support he can
marshal if he is to solve the serious economic and political problems he
will face over the coming year. Although there is a reasonable chance
that Cerezo will be able to manage effectively the problems he
confronts, miscalculations—particularly on economic matters or rela-
tions with the military—could jeopardize the long-term Prospects not
only of his government, but also of the democratic process. Asay

“Guatemala is suffering its worst economic crisis in half a century,
and the economy will be Cerezo’s most pressing problem. The President
will need to implement an effective domestic economic austerity
program to attract increased foreign assistance and to halt the severe
economic decline. Needed reforms will entail increased taxes and
reduced public subsidies, probably resulting in considerable public
opposition. We believe that there is a better-than-even chance that he
will adopt an economic adjustment program

   

 

The maintenance of positive relations with the military will be an
important political priority for Cerezo.

   

Other issues, such as the conduct of the
counterinsurgency and the military budget, will be potential sources of

-" See NIE ITA 86-10001, Gustemala: Progress on Human Nahe Seon 35neBo January 1986. (v)

 

 

3
SE
Page-5
t MOsgSeMRECONTRACT/ORCON

friction, but we believe both civilian and military leaders will work to
keep disagreements within manageable limits. As a consequence, we
al will be only a small chance of a coup over the coming

. year. F,

The size and effectiveness of the radical leftist insurgency has been
reduced substantially since 1982, and it does not now constitute a
serious threat to the government. We do not expect a substantial
resurgence in guerrilla activity in 1986, but the insurgents are likely to
receive sufficient external support, particularly Cuban and Nicaraguan,
to remain a viable military force. The Guatemalan military is capable
‘ “ of keeping the insurgency contained but will not be able significantly to
increase pressure on the guerrillas without additional foreign military
- aid. The armed forces suffer important mobility, maintenance, and 7 .
, communications deficiencies, which continue to limit their effective-
ness. Although Cerezo is likely to extend an amnesty offer to the
guerrillas, a negotiated end to the guerrilla war in 1986 is unlikely.

   

 

 

Under Cerezo, Guatemala probably will take a more
active role in the Contadora process, and Cerezo will strengthen
relations with other Christian Democratic parties and governments in

Central America—including that of Salvadoran President Duarte. ga?

We see little danger that Guatemala will be drawn into the Soviet-
Cuban orbit over the coming year. Cerezo has raised the possibility of
establishing relations with Cuba, although we do not believe that this is
motivated by any sympathy for Cuba or that he regards this as an
important priority. Instead, he is likely to make improved relations with
Mexico a top priority and eventuallymove to resolve Guatemala’s long-
standing dispute with Belize. '

Beyond the development of democracy and foreign policy, US
interests will be principally engaged in Guatemala on questions of aid

SE
Page-6
SECR)
NOFORN/| RACT/ORCON

and human rights. Cerezo will probably solicit US support in debt
rescheduling and discussions with the IMF. Guatemala will also contin-
ue to make gradual progress on human rights, although we do not
expect this issue to recede in importance and visibility. In addition, we
judge that narcotics trafficking could become a more important bilater-
al issue during 1986. .

We are cautiously optimistic that Guatemala will make progress in
consolidating its democratic institutions in 1986. However, the system
will remain fragile and vulnerable to internal and external develop-
ments beyond its control, such as a new world recession or an inability
to attract necessary foreign assistance.
Page-7
s
fo. NOFORN/WOCONTRACT/ORCON
—

 

DISCUSSION

1. The inauguration of President Vinicio Cerezo sounding 68-percent victory over Carpio in the
and the installation of a new Congress on 14 January 8 December presidential runoff election capped the
marked the successful fruition of a three-year transi- DCG's successes. Sow" :
tion from military to civilian tule in Guatemala. The ° 7
general elections of November 1985 provided Cerezo 2 The open and honest elections will Drovide the
and his center-left Christian Democratic Party (DCG) new government a greater degree of domestic and
an unexpectedly strong victory. In a field of eight, international legitimacy than previous governments.
Cerezo captured 39 percent of the vote, while second- The armed forces, under former chief of state General
place finisher Jorge Carpio Nicolle of the moderate Mejia, maintained a strict neutrality in the electoral
National Centrist Union (UCN) managed 20 percent. Drocess, and the balloting was peaceful and fairly
Further, the DCG gained an absolute majority in the administered. Rightist parties did Doorly, winning only
100-member congress. winning 51 seats. Cerezo’s re- 13 congressional seats and suffering surprising defea

Figure 1
Representation in the Congress

 

Party of Coaliticn Le aided Ortentat§¢@ Right

gg :
Social Democratic Party — 2 (Number of Seats)

 

 

Christian Democratic Party — | 5) - 4

 

 

 

National Centrist Union ______.

Democratic Party of National

Cooperation/Revolutionary

Party®
National Renewal Party 1

National Authentic Ceater I:

National Liberation
Movemeavastitutional
Democratic Party

* Jorge Serrano, leader of the Democratic Party of National Cooperation,
Sea Aly is forming 4 aew “moderately conservative” party called the

‘Social Action Movement.
soe

 

 

Confrtential Worory

soates 2-08
Page-8
Sl
NOFORYMOEONTRACT/ORCON

in their eastern Guatemala strongholds. Cerezo's main
formal political opposition will be from the centrist
UCN rather than the right. The widespread sccep-
tance of the electoral results and his clear majority in
Congress should place Cerezo's government on a firm
political footing. (s

3. Cerezo will need all the domestic and interna-
tional support he can marshal, as he will face serious
economic and political problems at the outset of his

term. Guatemala is confronting its worst economic .

crisis _in_half a century.

tested by Guatemala's tenacious insurgency and con-
tinued political violence. A failure to continue to
contain the insurgency is likely to hinder Guatemala’s
economic recovery and cause increased friction with
sa political parties and the armed forces.

The Economy

4. The most pressing problem the new government
will face is a deteriorating economy. With Central

    

America’s largest resource base and population, Cuate-
mala has the potential to be the most dynamic econo-
my in the region. Per capita GDP, however, has fallen
by nearly 20 percent from its 1980 peak, a decline
unprecedented in the lifetime of most Guatemalan
As with most less developed countries, Guatemala’s
economy was hit hard by the sharp rise in oil prices in
1979, the ensuing world recession, and worsening
terms of trade as commodity prices fell. The situation
was exacerbated by domestic and regional turmoil—
tourism earnings plummeted while the Central Ameri-
can Common Market (CACM) was seriously disrupted.
The failure of successive military governments to take
necessary adjustment measures also contributed to
economic decline.

5. The situation Cerezo inherits is serious but prob-
ably can be tumed around if the government acts
decisively to implement a comprehensive economic
stabilization program. Guatemala is experiencing sig-
nificant external imbalances, mounting arrears, and a
growing fiscal deficit. Foreign exchange reserves are
exhausted:

— The GDP, which declined about 1.5 percent in”
1985, will probably remain sluggish.

— Guatemala is experiencing unprecedented infla-
Hon—the rate rose at least 30 percent in 1985
compared with less than 4 percent in the previ-
ous year. Inflation is likely to increase in 1986
unless the government restores fiscal and mone-
tary discipline.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Guatemala: Balance of Payments a Million US $
1983 1964 1985 1996»

Current account balance 224 “37 2s ~345
Trade balance «6 -3#0 2 125
Exports (f.0.b.) 3,002 1,132 1,123 1273
Imports (fo.b.) = 1,056 —1,18 — 1,004 721.150
Net services —290 356 ~36 7-400
Net transfers 30 29 22 30
Capital account balance, errors and omissions 313 92 99 =
Net change in international reserves (excludes stock of arrears) 89 ~%s = 186 =33

 

* Estimated.
* Projected.

This tbe Coss Reor,
Page-9
neerney

—The unfinanced balance-of-payments gap, ex-
cluding the stock of arrears ($500 million), to-
taled $186 million in 1985 and will worsen
substantially in 1986 without a significant change
in economic policies. As a result, the local curren-
cy—the quetzal—will remain under severe
Dressure.

— Debt service obligations will peak this year, rising

to some 50 percent of export earnings unless
some relief is provided.

6. If Cerezo is to establish the basis for a long-term
recovery and obtain increased foreign assistance, he

will have to implement economic adjustment and *

austerity measures. These, however, will have a signif-
icant potential to provoke public protest. An important
first step in an adjustment program would be the
unification of the exchange rates for the quetzal—in
effect, a devaluation. Cerezo will also be pressed to
eliminate fuel subsidies, increasing the domestic price
of gasoline and of fuel-dependent public services such
as electricity and transportation. When the Meiia
government attempted to increase bus fares in
September 1985, the resultant furor threatened Mejia’s
position and caused him to rescind the increases. These
measures would be inflationary in the near term,
cutting living standards for Guatemala’s poor and
lower middle classes—the principal constituency of
the DOG—thus to the political costs of auster-
ity measures.

7. An effective adjustment program would Tequire
that Cerezo reduce the fiscal gap; this would involve
significant improvement in Guatemala's extremely
inefficient tax system. Tax receipts as a percentage of
GNP are among the lowest in the hemisphere and
have been declining. The private sector is unlikely to
support any rise in taxes unless the government also
relaxes price controls and adopts other reforms. Mejia's
imposition of export taxes and increased import duties
and value-added taxes in April 1985 met with a
firestorm of protest from the business community.
Meiia responded by withdrawing the increases and
removing the Minister of Finance.

 

 

  

HUNT RAL T/OKLON

8. Another immediate concern for Cerezo will be a
severe foreign exchange shortage, particularly in the
first six months of 1986. To alleviate’ this problem,
Cerezo is seeking to gain a substantial increase in
foreign aid Although he will rely heavily on the
United States, Western Europe, and Japan, Cerezo will
also look to Venezuela and Mexico to assure the
continued supply of oil Guatemala will be hard
Dressed to meet immediate debt obligations unless it
can obtain relief from official and commercial credi-
tors. To be successful in obtaining increased assistance
and debt relief will require that Guatemala develop an
adjustment program endorsed by the IMF. for

9. There is a wide range of potential outcomes for
the Guatemalan economy over the course of Cerezo's
term, and we believe that his actions over the first year
will have a critical impact on long-term economic
developments. Thus far, Cerezo has publicly indicated

he will pursue necessary adjustment measures and will

rezo has also

least, follow
moderate economic policies. We believe political con-
ditions over the first six months of his administration
would permit implementation of an adjustment pro-
gram acceptable to the IMF. If Cerezo follows appro-
Driate policies over the next two years or 50, we believe
the economy will stand a good chance of returning to
Positive per capita CDP growth. Gypncty

11. A less Hkely possibility is that Cerezo may
abandon austerity and pursue a populist agenda. The
tole of the small but increasingly influential labor
movement could be important in pushing Cerezo to
take such steps. The principal labor group, the moder-
ate leftist Confederation of Guatemalan Syndicalist
Unity (CUSG), is reportedly inclined to grant Cerezo
time to establish his economic program, but some

seat
Page-10
NOFORN/!

 

SE
ONTRACT/ORCON:

 

Figure 2
Guatemala: Selected Economic Indicators

Consumer Price Growth= (Percent)

 

 

Real GDP Growth (Percent)
4

0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cut tr

 

Manufacturing (Index 1980=100)

 

Asriculture Output (Index 1980100)

 

Savings and Investment? (Percent)

Savings— _—lavestment

   
 

 

Budget Deficit as a Share of GDP (Percent) : .
t

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Real Minimum Wages (Index 1980)

   

 

Per Capita GDP (Index 1980=100)

 

 

 

is ke ed Pa

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 E =
a ee f4~<
5 ~ z :
80a 82 3 4 ae

# Average annual.
* Gross natlonal savings and gross capital formation as a share of GDP.
© Estimated.

ConfidentettREORN
Page-11
public employee unions could initiate strikes early in
the administration. If Cerezo is unable to show pro-
gtess on the economy, labor actions are likely to

  

 
 

Civilian Military Relations

12.-The military has been the dominant political
institution in Guatemala for the past 30 y

The maintenance of positive
relations with the military will clearly be an important
Driority for Cerezo. His task will be made easier by the
extent of his electoral victory and the fact that the
armed forces are anxious to relinquish the responsibil-
ities of government. The appointment of General
Hermandez—a moderate, apolitical, and unassuming
officer—as Minister of Defense will further facilitate
smooth military relations with the civilian govern-
ment. We believe there has been a broad attitudinal
shift within the armed forces in favor of civilian
government and the democgatic process|

 
 

 
  
 
   

  

| . NOFO! (/ORCON

—

The Guatemolon Milttory

With a strength of about 33,000, the Guatemalan
Ammny is spread among 20 active military zones, each
containing at least one infantry battalion. The Army is a
well-trained and competent counterinsurgency force. A
principal asset is its highly motivated and relatively
young officer corps; the proportion of senior officers is
small, and lieutenants and captains comprise over 80
percent of the corps. Principal arms suppliers include
Western Europe, Isrzel, and Argentina. Guatemala
Produces its own small arms ammunition but has
experienced shortages in larger munitions, including
mortar and artillery rounds. Other deficiencies include
inadequate communications and mobility and insuffi-
cient engineer equipment. (peff~

The Air Force inventory consists of about 100 air-
craft, including 32 helicopters—most of US origin—and
10 A-37B light attack jets. The cutoff of US military ald
in 1977 severely affected ‘the maintenance of US-
supplied aircraft. The operational availability of heli-

ts probably less than 50 percent. The A-37s often lac

functioning safety equipment, such as election seats.
Despite this, the Air Force has provided effective
tactical support to the Army. The small Navy, consist-
ing of 11 patrol craft, an amphibious craft, and two
hydrographic survey ships, can provide local security
but cannot effectively monitor Guatemala’s coasts,

 

15. MBMPBMwissue that could sharply divide Cerezo
and the armed forces will be the conduct of the
counterinsurgency. The military opposes the disband-
ing of the Civil Defense Force (CDF) or moves to
place the CDF under more direct civilian control and
supervision. Nevertheless, Cerezo has proposed local
referendums to determine the status of CDF units, and
Page-12
T
noromyaconttac T/ORCON

  

 

Political Violence in Guatemala

Violence has long been embedded in Guatemalan
political culture. Since at least the 1950s, politically
motivated murders and abductions have been carried
out by insurgents, government security forces, political
factions, and private individuals. The country’s reputa-
tion for violence, however, reached its peak under the
government of Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia (1978-82). As
the insurgency gained momentum in 1981, the govern-
ment responded with a campaign of violence against
the presumed supporters of the guerrillas in the coun-
tryside—especially against the largely Indian popula-
tion of the central highlands. Moreover, Lucas con-
doned—and in some cases probably directed—s policy
of eliminating leftist opponents of the government,
including labor leaders and moderate leftists not con-
nected with the insurgency. During this period, a
number of DCG political organizers were killed, and
Cerezo himself was the target of at least three assassina-
tion attempts. (

The excesses of the Lucas government produced a
backlash within the armed forces, resulting in a coup
that brought retired Gen. Efrain Rios Montt to power.
Ries Montt and his successor moved with some success
to reduce the level of violence. Gauging the extent of
this success is extremely difficult because it is often
impossible to identify the perpetrators of political vio-
lence or even to differentiate between political and
criminal violence. Nevertheless, US Embassy figures
suggest that politically motivated violence has been
significantly reduced and is now onthe order of 8
percent of what it was in 1981. (

We do not believe that the armed forces are system-
atically pursuing a policy of repression in the country-
side. For example, the “poles of development”—model
villages in the highlands—have been attacked by some
human rights groups as concentration camps, but exten-

sive investigation by the US Embassy has failed to
substantiate these charges. Abuses in the field, however,
do remain a serious problem, though we judge that
these are largely carried out by junior officers and
isolated detachments A key difficulty is that the mili-
tary fails to prosecute the offenders. Officers guilty of
serious violations are generally reassigned to positions
where they can be more easily controlled by their

superiors. soe?

     
 
    

We expect that, though Cerezo will move cautiously
in addressing the problem of political violence, he will
be able to make gradual progress in further curbing
human rights violations. Two key factors that could
frustrate his efforts will be the economy and insurgent
strategy. A continued deterioration of the economy
would probably produce some increase in the level of
violence conducted by leftwing and rightwing extrem-
ists. In particular, there is already some evidence of
teemergence of rightwing violence, probably intended
as a warning to Cerezo ever his economic policies.
Additionally, political violence would be greatly: exacer-
bated were the insurgents to adopt a strategy of inten-
sive urban terrorism. Such a strategy coulLprovoke a
harsh response by the security forces.

 

this is likely to be a continuing point of contention. In
addition, we judge the armed forces would accept
surrender and amnesty discussions with the guerrillas
but would reject negotiations involving any govern-
ment concessions such as a cease-fire, the recognition
of “liberated zones,” or the granting of any political
advantages to insurgent organizations. For his part
Cerezo has downplayed the idea of

 

16. There will be other points of civilian-military
contention, but we do not expect them to have a
critical impact on the new regime—especially in its
first year. The military budget, for example, could be

   
   

an area of dispute. In the past, the armed forces have
been able to augment their funds by tapping the
budgets of other ministries. Cerezo will seek to prevent
this and gain greater control over military spending.
Another sensitive area will be the internal administra-
tion of the armed forces, particularly such key matters
as retirements, promotions, and duty assignments. The
military hierarchy will strenuously protect these pre-
rogatives from civilian intrusion

 

17. Both the armed forces and Cerezo are likely to
work to keep any disagreements within manageable
limits. There are circumstances that could trigger
coup-plotting, most notably should Cerezo reverse
himself and attempt to exact retribution for past
Page-13
NoroRyymECONT RACT/ORCON

human rights offenses or other wrongdoing by the
military or should the government interfere with the
military's corporate interests or professional autono-
my. We do not expect widespread public disturbances
over government policies, but should public order
deteriorate, the potential for a coup would increase if
the armed forces felt that Cerezo mishandled the
situation or lost control. We believe that over the next
year, however, these are unlikely eventualities and
that there will be only a small chance of a military
coup.

— There is a somewhat greater probability that,
. through a series of gradual missteps, Cerezo
could over the longer term compromise his posi-
tion with the military and provoke some senti-
ment for a coup. Should it occur, a coup would
almost certainly intensify domestic political po-
larization and violence oar in an adverse

international reaction. (5

The Insurgency

18, Guatemala has had an insurgency problem
since the 1960s, but a number of factors—corruption
and repression under the Lucas government, the sux
cess of the Sandinistas, and increased Cuban support to
regional revolutionaries—led to a dramatic increase in
guerrilla activity beginning in 1979. Insurgent forces
grew from fewer than 1,000 combatants to about
3,000, and by early 1982 the three principal guerrilla
organizations threatened to wrest control of key north-
ern and western departments from the government.
The Army responded with a more aggressive—and
sometimes brutal—counterinsurgency effort $hat drove
many Indians into refuge in Mexico.

19. In March 1982 a military coup spearheaded by
teformist-minded officers brought to power retired
Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, who rapidly implemented a
new civic action program while continuing the em-
phasis on maintaining the tactical initiative. This
“bullets and beans” strategy—continued by General
Meijia—relies on an estimated 900,000-man Civil De-
fense Force to more directly involve the civilian
population in the establishment of local security,
military civic action companies to bring to rural areas
tangible benefits of cooperation with the government,
and “poles of development"—rebuilt and newly built
model villages—to revitalize the largely Indian-popu-
lated central and western highlands.

20. The implementation of this strategy, comple-
mented by an amnesty, has reduced insurgent forces

 

to about 1,500 and has severely undercut their popular
support. The guerrillas are restricted principally to a
belt about 50 miles wide along the border with Mexico
and are generally isolated from key population cen-
ters. The insurgents do not now present a critical
threat to public security, but they remain a viable
military force. The three major insurgent groups are
well organized, reasonably well armed, and able to
make use of safehavens on Mexican territory. The
level and scope of combat operations is—and is likely
to remain—limited, although the guerrillas have been
able to inflict more casualties on government forces
than they themselves have suffered during the past
year, due to greater guerri
traps, and ambushes.

    

 

  

13
scx
Page-14

Page-15
‘SE
NOFORN/NSOCONTRACT/ORCON

  

22. Over the next year, we see little chance for
dramatic growth of the insurgency. The guerrillas will
probably play a waiting game, Preserving their forces
in the hope that over the long run their Prospects will
improve if Cerezo proves unable to cope with Guate-
miala’s problems. The insurgents will retain the capa-
bility to mount small ambushes and harassing attacks
against the military. In addition, we expect that the
guerrillas will continue to use terrorism, assassinations,
and sabotage against economically important targets.
We expect that the insurgents will seek to strengthen
their urban terrorist networks, which so far have been
effectively neutralized by government security forces.
Although we believe that most insurgents will support
these tactics, some rebel leaders may try to adopt a
two-track strategy like that used by the FMLN in El
Salvador. This strategy would include the continuation
of military pressure while seeking direct negotiations
with the government

 
 

— On the whole, however, we believe the insur-
gents—who lack popular support and urban or-
ganization—will remain only a peripheral politi-
cal force and will not pose a critical threat to
public security through Cerezo’s first year. Gof

23. On the other hand, we do not expect a substan-
tial reduction in the insurgency in the next 12 months.
The armed forces are currently stretched to the limits
of their resources and will have a difficult time
increasing their counterinsurgency efforts. The princi-
pal limitations of the military are transportation,
communications, and logistics. The lack of mobility
has been a serious handicap because a key element of
the government's counterinsurgency tactics is the rap-
id movement of troops to seek out aggressively and
maintain contact with insurgent forces in their remote
operating areas. The magnitude of this task becomes
clearer when we recognize that the Guatemalan
armed forces are responsible for securing an area over
five times larger than El Salvador but with 10,000,
fewer troops than their Salvadoran counterparts. (

 

 

 
   
 

Foreign Policy

24. Guatemala began to emerge from its longstand-
ing diplomatic isolation in 1982 after the Rios Montt
coup. Since then, greater efforts have been made to
improve Guatemala's international image and reduce
its international isolation resulting from its poor hu-
man rights record. Mejia’s attempts to stem political
violence and support the electoral process laid the
foundations for improvements in Guatemala’s diplo-
matic relations. This was exemplified by the reestab-
lishment of relations with Spain, which had been
ruptured in early 1980. Guatemala also began to take a
more active role in regional matters with its participa-
tion in the Contadora talks:

— Guatemalan policy, traditionally anti-Commu-
nist, has been supportive of b
ge

  

25. We do not expect that Cerezo will effect dra-
matic changes in Guatemalan foreign policy, especial-
ly in his first year. His principal goal will be to
improve Guatemala’s international image and its
standing with potential Western aid donors. Cerezo
appears strongly committed to a regional political
solution to Central American problems. Along with his
support for the Contadora process, he has suggested
the creation of a Central American Parliament, in-
cluding the Sandinistas, as a mechanism for resolving
economic and political problems. He also sponsored a
meeting of most Central American leaders, including
President Ortega of Nicaragua, immediately after his
inauguration. LS

26. Cerezo has stated he will follow a policy of
“active neutrality,” which probably reflects a desire to
establish—in principle—his independence of the Unit-
ed States and of East-West conflict. This will lead to
somewhat more of a nonaligned tone in foreign policy
thetoric and increased friction with the United States _
on some

  

15
sent
Page-16
T
norosynSntnc T/ORCON

little danger that Guatemala will be drawn into the
Soviet-Cuban orbit over the coming year.

28. Cerezo has raised the possibility of establishing
diplomatic relations with Cuba, but we have no
indication that he regards this as an immediate foreign
policy priority. We are uncertain of his motivation for
this suggestion, but we do not believe that it represents
any sympathy for Cuba or its goals. He may regard the
initiation of relations as a means of demonstrating
Guatemala’s neutralist policy as well as moderating
Cuban policy toward Guatemala. In any event, we see

$1. Guatemala’s longstanding territorial claim on

|. Belize is not likely to surface as a major issue during

Cerezo’s first year. Guatemala does not recognize
Belizean sovereignty and has officially regarded Belize
as Guatemalan territory. In past discussions with the
British—who maintain a military force in Belize—the
Guatemalan Government has scaled back its demands.
So far the talks have foundered on the question of
territorial concessions. Cerezo will be flexible in seek-

ing & peaceful sol 7
ee —

at)

sgeef
Page-17
NOFORNYHEONTRACT/ORCON

probably does not enjoy an immediate priority on his
foreign policy agenda. To facilitate an agreement, he
will probably establish formal diplomatic relations
with the United Kingdom, but we do not expect major
developments in negotiations soon.

— A related problem will be Guatemalan insurgents :

in Belize

Army operations near
Belize will result in border incursions and inci-
dents with Belizean or British forces. However,

~ unless guerrilla use of Belize increases dramati-
cally—an unlikely development—we do not be-
lieve that border problems will pose major diffi-
culties for

the Gwatemalan or Belizean
Governments (sath

Implications for the United States

32. The installation of a new civilian government is
a decisive step toward the US goal of a stable demo-
cratic political system in Guatemala, but continued
progress toward that end is far from assured. We
believe that Cerezo’s administration will almost cer-
tainly survive its first year in office, especially because
its task will be initially eased by a general enthusiasm
for the return to civilian rule, moderation on the part
of the military and important sectors of organized
labor, and by the disarray of the right. But the
decisions Cerezo takes—or fails to take—will have 2
critical impact on the longer term viability both of his
government and of the democratic process. (orf)

99 MEN scenarios for the
progress of Cerezos a istration over the coming

year.

— First, there is a better-than-even chance that
Cerezo will be able to consolidate his position,
Dursue an economic adjustment program, con-
tain his political opposition, and avoid antagoniz-
ing the military. Our chief concerns are that he
will fail to take all the actions necessary to
stabilize the economy or that his economic policy
will become a patchwork of compromise and
half-measures, often at cross-purposes with one
another. Nevertheless, Cerezo has so far indicat-
ed he has a good perception of potential prob-
lems and the political skills to resolve them
successfully,

—A less likely possibility is that Cerezo might
shrink from making difficult decisions or over-

 
   

7

play his hand. In such a scenario, we would
anticipate heightened activism by the private
sector, labor, and rightist political parties as the
economy deteriorates, with an increased likeli-
hood of public demonstrations and disturbances.
The confidence of the military in the govern-
ment’s ability to preserve public order would
gradually erode, though a coup in the first year
or two of the administration would be unlikely.

  
 

34. Beyond the development of democracy and
foreign policy, US interests will be principally engaged
in Guatemala on questions of aid and human rights.
Cerezo will look to the United States for increased
economic aid, but we believe he has a realistic appre-
ciation for the level of assistance he can expect during
1986. He has not requested increased military aid, but
we expect that the military will purchase spare parts,
vehicles, and perhaps communications and engineer-
ing equipment from the United States. Cerezo will also
seek US support in rescheduling Guatemala’s external
debt and reaching an agreement with the IMF. There
is no indication that he plans on taking a confronta-
tional approach to the debt issue, but surging debt
Tepayment requirements this year could raise pres-
sures on him to follow the Peruvian example and
unilaterally limit repayment. We expect Cerezo to
make continued progress on human rights issues,
particularly if he follows through on his stated intent
to reorganize the national police and the criminal
Justice system. He will press for US assistance in police
training, and we judge that such training would
greatly contribute to raising the professionalism of the
police. We do not expect the human rights issue

recede in importance and visibility, however. a

35. An issue that may emerge into greater bilateral
Drominence in the next year is narcotics trafficking.

pati
Page-18
SEC

NOFORN/|!

Guatemala is well suited as a narcotics transshipment
point. It offers traffickers good access by land, sea, and
air and a relatively permissive environment, as the
security forces have a very limited capability to police
Guatemala's borders—radar coverage, for example, is
nonexistent outside Guatemala City. Though we lack
information on the extent of trafficking, we believe
that the increase in trafficking throughout Central
America could lead to a rise in transshipment through
Guatemala. There are also limited indications of insur-
gent involvement with drug traffickers. We expect
that, if the drug problem becomes increasingly signifi-
cant, Cerezo will be cooperative with the United States
on drug enforcement matters.

36. We are cautiously optimistic that Guatemala
will make progress in consolidating its democratic
institutions in 1986. However, through—and be-

INTRACT/ORCON

yond—the time frame of this Estimate, the system will
remain fragile and vulnerable to internal and external
developments, such as a new world recession or an
inability to attract sufficient foreign aid. We also
recognize that one lesson of recent political history in
Central America is that, given unsettled domestic
conditions and sufficient external support, insurgen-
cies can grow dramatically within a short space of
time. Thus, although we do not expect significant
adverse developments in Guatemala over the coming
year, we are not equally confident about the long-term
prospects for Guatemalan democracy. The depth of
the country’s economic problems, the fragility of the
emerging political system, the tenacity of the insurgent
threat, and the political violence will render Guatema-
la of continuing concern to the United States for some
time to come. .