
Page-1
erage. Director of
fps Central
Fe]! intettizence
e.

  

Guatemala: Prospects for
the New Government

Natoaal Lnteltigeace Estimate
Asaex C

Approved tor Rekeagg

Date ln |
JEN “855

-—

cwr 200
Page-2
ae ea eae ae y = _
Oe eS he a mr real ss SS
wee ss

GUATEMALA: PROSPECTS FOR
THE NEW GOVERNMENT

ANNEX C

Inf ve math evailalde as of 20 femur 1986 wa werd
kn the peeperstion of thi Enimate, shah war
eppened by the Netiunal Foretas Intethernre Rosrd
on 13 February 1086
Page-3
ANNEX C
FOREIGN SUPPORT TO THE INSURGENTS

 
  
    
 

and some of the Soviet of alll coptured Insurgent
countries have provided ‘Guatemalan insurgents with! fof guerrilla-training in
training, money, aad perhaps some arms ‘Over the Nicaragua and 18 months in Cubs. The insurgent also
past few years, however, the success of the Guatema- reported that two 40-man platoons received similar
lan Government's counterinsursency campaign a1 training in Nicaragua in preparation for their infiltea-
the failure of the various guerrilla groups to unify — Ulon intg,San Mar from
appears to have caused foreign support to the rebels to Mex! March
diminish. During 1985 Havana and Managua contine == 1985 7 were
ved to supply communications support ‘and training trained in Cubs and Nicaragua and that most ORPA
assistance, while Moscow reportedly gave financlil ald commanders and hall of their Iroops alo were trained
to the PCT/O. We have no evidence to confirm thal there. Last Jul

Z nsfers were completed during tal new guert ructon) were
atilirated trom Nicaragua into Guatemala using fabsi-
bam) [ied Nicaraguan passports The new hutructors report:
edly were Colombian, Nicaraguan, ind Chileanend

all traveled as Nicaraguan ref

pn arms support in recent

Cuba, Nicaragua,

   
 
 
 
      

  
 

 

 

    
   
    
  
 
 

  
  

 
     

  

a was plaming to send
Harms shipment to the PGT/O. The source says that
Managua agreed to allow the shipmet to pass through
Nicaragua and that the Communist ‘arty of El Salva-
dor would help transfer the arms to:he Custemalans

A) Thus far, we have no ind! itlon the suerrill
a ved the Bulgarian shipmet
i ustemalan insure ive arms

Bulk of the training given to the Guatemilan

eatreme Jeft occurs In Cuba, although « limted ‘and other supplies through Meaky and sometimes

amount is provided by the Sandinistas. Managua pod- Belize. In edition, we believe hat land routes

ably plays a greater role in facilitating the travd of through Honduras for weapons {roa Nicararus dese
Uned for the Salvadorans probably

training candidgtes to Havana. For example, in Sep, used
tember 1 transport materiel to the Guaternalar,