
Page-1
Declassified and Approved for Release
by the Central Intelligence Agency
Date: 200 |
Page-2

Page-3
SNIE 11-6-76

IMPLICATIONS OF THE
1975 SOVIET HARVEST
Page-4
THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS,
EXCEPT AS NOTED IN THE TEXT, AS FOLLOWS:

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
the estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments
of State, Defense, and Treasury, and the National Security Agency.

Concurring:
The Deputy Director of Central Intelligence representing the Central Intelligence _
‘Agency
The Director of {atelligence and Research representing the Department of State
The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
The Director, National Security Agency

The Special Assistant to the Secretary for National Security, Department of the
Treasury

Abstaining:
The Deputy Assistant Adminisfrator for National Security, Energy Research and
Development Administration

The Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation

Also Participating:
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Page-5
CONTENTS

  
 
   
  

PRINCIPAL JUDGMENTS .
I. INTRODUCTION .

 

 

 

 

  
  

 

 

 

I. DEVELOPMENTS IN 1975 0... 0000. oo ooo oeeeceeceeeeceeees 4
The 1975 Crop Shortfall... 22.0.0. o eee cee ccc eee ee 4
Immediate Measures ...... : 4
Consumer Unaffected So Far 6
The Rest of the Economy in 1975 . . 6
Hard-Currency Crunch .........0..0........... 6

UL THE OUTLOOK FOR 1976 .... 0-0. -e cece Fite 6
The Consumer Suffers .. 6
Growth in 1976 ......... 8
Foreign Trade and Payments Policy in 197 8
Impact of Another Crop Failure ........ 9

IV. LONGER-TERM PROSPECTS 9
Longer-Term Economic Outlook .... c - 9
Soviet Need for US Grain ... 10
Longer-Term Outlook for Agriculture ll
The Political Outlook ................ - 2

V. IMPACT ON MILITARY PROGRAMS ....0.... 0.0... 000 ececee es. 12

VI. IMPLICATIONS FOR EASTERN EUROPE ........................ 13

ANNEX A: Agriculture in the Soviet Union ..........00606-.- 0000000. 15

ANNEX B: Problems in Soviet Agricultural Technology ................. 17

ANNEX C: Soviet Grain Balance 22.0... 600. 000... c occ cc ccee cece... 19

SECRET
Page-6
IMPLICATIONS OF THE
1975 SOVIET HARVEST

PRINCIPAL JUDGMENTS

The 1975 harvest was the worst in the Brezhnev era. Grain pro-
duction fell to less than two thirds of stated needs, with the livestock
sector especially hard hit by feedgrain shortages. Despite cancella-
tion of long-standing export commitments to. Eastern Europe, extensive
purchases abroad, and resort to stringent conservation measures, the
regime will be unable to make up the shortfall. Distress slaughtering,
already begun, promises to set back Brezhnev’s meat production pro-
gram for some years to come. The GNP growth rate fell from less
than 4 to about 24% percent.

Inside the USSR, the effects of the harvest are only now beginning
to show up in consumer supplies. Meat shortages will become fairly
widespread before long, and the quality of the national diet is likely
to deteriorate by early summer. There will be widespread grumbling
in the urban centers and possibly occasional disorders, outside the
major cities. Criticism and debate within the regime on agricultural
policy can be expected to mount.

Nevertheless, the regime’s control mechanisms are adequate to cope
with popular dissatisfaction even if malaise becomes pervasive. In
any event, existing military programs will not be affected, and mili-
tary programs would be among the last to be altered in any series
of agricultural crises. Nor is the power position of the present leader-
ship likely to be challenged, although Brezhnev's prestige and that
of certain of his colleagues can hardly escape some damage.

1
SECRET
Page-7
SECRET

Another poor harvest in 1976 or 1977, however, could generate
domestic difficulties on a scale that would affect regime cohesion.
The succession problem would then take on more urgency, and the
chances of factionalism would increase as the agricultural issue became
critical.

In any event, even if the Soviets manage to cope adequately with
the effects of the 1975 harvest, climatic handicaps and the cumber-
some agricultural system make it likely that their grain targets over
the next five years will not be met. If so, the Soviets will periodically
need more than the 8 million tons of imports to which they now
have ready access under terms of the US-USSR grain deal. In terms
of “leverage,” the five-year grain import agreement was an example
of the Soviets yielding to US pressure for regularized behavior in the
grain market in order to obtain needed supplies. However, unless
requirements for US supplies substantially exceed 8 million tons,
reliance on the US will normally have only marginal moderating in-
fluence on other aspects of the USSR’s international behavior:

— Moscow already has assurances that some US grain will be avail--
able every year for the next five;

— the Soviets doubt the capacity or willingness of the US Govern-
ment, given domestic considerations, to impose and maintain
effective controls on exports;

— short-term purchases can usually be made from other suppliers
as well; and

— over the longer term the Soviets could shift the patterns of their *
imports toward non-US suppliers.

Another major harvest failure during the next year or two would
throw the USSR into acute temporary dependence on foreign grain
supplies. In that contingency, Moscow would probably judge it ad-
visable to avoid threatening or highly offensive behavior for a time.
And the recurring and heightened need for US grain (would be one
of the significant arguments in Moscow in favor of keeping US-USSR
bilateral relations on an even keel and promoting mutual interests.

But in terms of implications for US policy, the “leverage” inherent
in such a temporary dependency is limited. The stringencies that
would face the regime are unlikely to be so desperate, nor the extent
of US power to withhold goods so great, as to compel the USSR to
substantially alter any important element of its domestic or foreign
policy in response. to outside pressure. Indeed, overt pressure from
abroad would probably unify the leadership behind a negative reac-

2
SECRET
Page-8
SECRET

tion. If the result were reduced access to foreign grain, the regime
would, we judge, be able to maintain control over increasingly dis-
gruntled consumers.

The East European regimes stand to be tested as a result of the 1975
harvest. More than half of their normal grain imports come from the
USSR, and these have been cut off for the current crop year, forcing
them into Western markets. This phenomenon is likely to recur, prob-
ably compelling a reduction in East European imports of Western
capital goods (of which the US share is small). Any sharp reduction in
living standards in East Europe carries with it a heightened risk of
popular disorders, more so than would be the case in the USSR. While
the USSR probably will provide some financial assistance to its clients
in their time of troubles, it will resist any accelerated redirection of
their trade patterns toward the West. This will be a persistent dilemma
for both the Soviets and the East Europeans.

As for the USSR’s own trade, grain imports will be the main cause
of a 1976 hard-currency trade deficit of $3-5 billion, following a record
deficit estimated at $4.7 billion last year. This will force the USSR
to bargain hard for low-interest credits and to sell gold. Some major
purchases may be deferred, but the USSR presently intends to con-
tinue to increase its imports of high-technology Western products.
Page-9
1. INTRODUCTION

1. The harvest disaster in 1975 has been the
severest test yet of Brezhnev’s guns and butter
economic policy. This policy has stressed sharply
higher rates of growth for personal consumption
while continuing traditional high priorities for the
military and heavy industry. Rapid expansion of
meat supplies and supplies of other livestock prod-
ucts has been the backbone of Brezhnev’s consumer
program. The urgency of this program has been
heightened by a rapid rise in consumer incomes,
another feature of the regime's program.

2. In the past five years the regime has expanded
livestock herds to attain meat goals quickly, with-
out first ensuring adequate supplies of feedgrains,
gambling on an extended period of above-average
weather. Massive grain imports following the 1972
harvest shortfall were sufficient to avert substantial
herd reductions, but even larger grain purchases in
1975 were inadequate to prevent large-scale dis-
tress slaughtering. This has cut deeply into live-
stock numbers, jeopardizing progress in providing
quality foods and probably raising questions in
Moscow about the viability of the basic policy.

fl. DEVELOPMENTS IN 1975

The 1975 Crop Shortfall

3. The 1975 crop failure was the worst during
the Brezhnev period. Farm output fell about 8%
percent. Production of all major crops, which ac-

counts for about two fifths of total agricultural
output, suffered from a severe drought during: much

of the 1975 growing season (Table 1). Grain pro-
duction amounted to only about 140 million tons,
roughly 50 million tons below the average for
1971-74 and the worst in the postwar period when
measured as a deviation from the long-term trend.
Output of other major crops such as sugar beets
and sunflower seeds—an important source of vege-
table oil—was also below 1974 levels. Further, the
drought dried up pastures and reduced supplies
of forage crops, compounding the shortage of
feedgrains.

"> Immediate Measures

4, Grain production was less than two thirds of
needs, hitting the livestock sector the hardest. The
regime did everything it could to maintain herds,
using such stopgap measures as shipping animals
from drought to non-drought areas and feeding
reeds, leaves, and other low-grade feed stuffs to
starving livestock. Even long-standing export com-
mitments to Eastern Europe, heretofore considered
sacrosanct, were canceled to save about 5 million
tons of grain. Finally, since June 1975 the USSR
is estimated to have contracted for about 27 million
tons of foreign grain, largely for delivery during
Fiscal Year 1976. In this connection, the Soviets
for the first time committed themselves to a long-
term grain import agreement with the United
States for the purchase of 6-8 million tons per
year for the five years beginning October 1, 1976."

1 The terms of the agreement allow for exceptions. The
US may sell less than 6 million tons if it declares a shortage.
It may sell more than 8 million tons if the USSR need is
exceptional and US supplies permit.
Page-10
SECRET

 

Annual
i Average
| 1966-70

1971

 

5 on
5 ED
7 12

 

Production of major farm
commodities

167.6
94.8
Std

6.4
19.5
6.1
16
30.6
393

  

 

Wool (thousand tons).

Livestock inventories (ond
of year.

 

 

livestock feed. Price weights for 1970 have been

 

adjusted for changes in herd inventories.

 

liveweight prices in 1970.

A supplemental agreement requires that at least
one third of all grain shipped be carried in US

 

 

 

~ + Rate of Growth (Percent)-

 

' Agricultural output for sales and home consumption

‘“ End-of-year inventories for cattle, hogs, sheep,

Table I

USSR: PRODUCTION OF MAJOR CROPS

Annual
Average Estimated
972 19731974" 1971-74 1975 =

 

 

“6.5 14.9 -1.3 Ls 8.5
~10.7 29.6 -11.3 0.2 - 10.0
~3.2 4.0 3.5 2.6 -7.0
~~ Million Metrie Tons - - --- ~~ 222.
222.5 195.7 191.9 140.0
108.2 $1.0 90.0 83:5
87.0 76.4 73.0 70-75
TA 6.8 6.2 5.0
25.9 23.1 22.5 22.5
a7 S.4 7.6 7.9 .
13.5 4.6 13.7 1.2
$3.3 91.3 86.6 90.3
433 461 436 463
~~ Index (1965=100) ------ 2-22
"15.3 118.6 114.6 147

 

 

minus farm products used for.seed and
aggregating the physical output of crops

 

used in

and animal products (including changes in inventories of livestock).
| 5 Value of food and technical crops less sced biut including the Portion fed to livestock.
5 Value of output of meat, milk, eggs, wool, and other livestock products less livestock feed and

goats, and poultry weighted by relative

poultry by late summer. Scattered sources indicate
that private owners also were killing their animals

bottoms at a shipping cost well above the current during the fall. Private farmers provide about one
4 world market rate. 7 third of the country’s meat and own over two fifths
q f the hogs and cattle and about half of the poultry.
5. Despite all these measures and the use of © Tei Po
nonstrategie grain reserves? feed supplies have Asa t inventories of hogs and poultry drop ped
] t inadequate. As a result, state and coll lective 20 percent and 15 percent respectively during 1975.
4 farms began distress slaughtering of hogs and 50 far, sheep and cattle have been telatively un-
affected. Despite the sharp decrease in the number
? That is, inventories held as carry-over stocks to minimize _of animals during the fourth quarter of 1975, meat
ie paige In austere output did not increase noticeably. Part of the re-
for strategic purposes, to supply the military forces and the duction in livestock numbers probably reflects de-
economy with needed food in time of war. When non- cisions to reduce farrowing and hatching rates in
ot Wie adge at pene authors adi anticipation of reduced feed supplies. In addition,
Paine sllocited for consumption and are not being used to any animals were killed prematurely, and due
bolster strategic reserves, (see Annex Cc). to the earlier reduction in rations, the normal
5
| SEGRE
{
td
Page-11
SECREE

slaughter class was underweight—a harbinger of
difficulties to come.

Consumer Unaffected So Far

6. In general, the consumer was unaffected
during 1975 by agriculture’s problems. An inven-
tory of processed foods, coupled with the usual
lag between a crop shortfall and a downturn in
livestock production, kept enough food in the mar-
keting pipeline. For the year as a whole, per capita
food consumption increased 1% percent and meat
consumption was up 1 percent, reaching a record.
level. Only late in the year, in parts of the drought-
stricken area, shortages of some food products—
particularly flour and in some cases sugar—were
reported. Meat prices rose in the free markets, but
this was due not to shortages but rather to higher
incomes and greater demand. There was some evi-
dence that by late summer provincial officials were
scrambling to line up provisions for their areas in
anticipation of shortages. Thus far, there has been
less evidence of consumer grumbling and hoarding
than in previous bad years.

The Rest of the Economy in 1975

7. After slowing from an average annual rate
of growth of 4%. percent in 1971-73 to less than
4 percent in 1974, Soviet GNP growth slumped
even further in 1975—to about 2% percent. The
low GNP growth rates during the past two years
were due to two successive years of decline in
agricultural output. Other sectors of the economy
were not visibly affected by agriculture’s problems
in 1975. Industrial output in particular equaled the
average annual rate achieved for the 1971-74 period.
The rate of growth in the other principal sectors
either maintain the same pace (services and trans-
portation) or fell moderately (construction).

Hard-Currency Crunch

8. Imports of grain cost the Soviets over $1 bil-
lion in 1975, increasing the hard-currency deficit
to an estimated $4.7 billion—a record. The basic
causes of last year’s deficit were a rapid rise in most
categories of imports—up an estimated $4 billion
to roughly $13 billion—and very little export
growth because of the recession in the West. A
weak. gold market in 1975 induced the Soviets to

borrow heavily in Western money markets, in-
creasing Soviet indebtedness significantly.

“Ill, THE OUTLOOK FOR 1976

9. The main impact of the 1975 crop failure will
be felt in 1976. The consumer will be hardest hit,
but growth of industrial production and GNP also
will be slowed, and the Soviets will continue to
carry a large hard-currency. trade deficit. More-
over, the USSR's agricultural situation will remain
precarious with carry-over stocks of grain depleted,
livestock herds reduced, remaining livestock under.
fed, and output goals dependent on above-average
weather.

The Consumer Suffers .

10. Probably the most serious problem in 1976
will be an expected one-quarter drop in per capita
meat consumption. This will return the consumer
to the level of the late 1960s. Although per capita
consumption of meat has increased 21 percent
since 1970, and 48 percent since 1960, the average
Soviet citizen still eats only two fifths as much
meat as his US counterpart and three fourths as
much as the average Pole or Hungarian.

11. In addition, an expected downtum in egg
and milk production from 1975 levels, albeit less
severe, will further erode the quality of the Soviet
diet. This decrease in availability of livestock prod-
ucts will temporarily reverse the steady decline in .
the share of starchy staples in the average Soviet
diet. Bread and potatoes currently account for one
half of the calories consumed (see Figure 1).

12. Domestic and imported feed supplies will not
be sufficient to support livestock inventories at
the 1 January 1976 level. Distress slaughtering of
livestock—possibly extending to cattle—will thus
occur at least in the first quarter of 1976. Animals
will continue to be slaughtered at lighter-than-
normal weights. Production of meat will therefore
drop off during the first part of the year, and
sporadic shortages in certain areas will occur. By
spring, herds will be small enough to be supported
by seasonal grazing and available feed. Meat pro-
duction, however, will then be at its lowest level,
and prolonged shortages of meat—especially in
tural areas—will be common throughout the sum-
mer. Even as the 1976 crop becomes available,

SECRET
Page-12
i . “SECRET.

Figure 1

USSR

&

 
 
 
 
 
    

Grain Products
and Potatoes

50%

    
  
   

 

efforts to rebuild the average weight of animals in
order to support breeding will keep meat produc-
] tion at depressed levels.

 

13. The USSR probably will try to import meat
~~in 1976-to augment domestic supplies. Non-US meat
supplies appear adequate to permit the USSR to
buy at least one-half million tons, equaling esti-
mated 1975 purchases, and perhaps to double that
amount. Purchases of one million tons—about as
much as available Soviet port and storage facilities
could handle—would bolster per capita meat sup-
plies by roughly 10 percent but would add about
$1 billion to the Soviets’ already large import bill.

14. Other foods generally should be available.
There should be no prolonged bread shortages even
though the quality of bread will be lowered—as
already seen in some markets—by increasing the
extraction rate in milling grain into flour. Distribu-
tion failures will produce spot shortages, however,
and supplies of flour at retail outlets will be gen-
erally limitéd. The effects of the 1975 shortfall in
sugar beet production should be largely offset by
stepped-up imports of sugar from Cuba. Similarily,

 

Meat and Fish

Vegetables,.
Fruits, Eggs, etc.

‘Sugar

Milk and
Milk Products

(Excluding Butter)

Fats & Oils

Composition of Diets, 1974.

US

   
 
 
   
  

 

3250 —Calories per day per person—3350

568768 2-76

although output of sunflower seed fell in. 1975,
scheduled imports of soybeans and the availability
of other oilseed crops should be sufficient to avoid
vegetable oil shortages.

15. Consumer reaction to the expected meat
shortages is difficult to predict. The Soviet people
have traditionally accepted programs to build the
military and boost industrial production as justify-
ing a slow growth in living standards. Although
shortages and price increases stemming from Khru-
shchev's agrarian policies sparked considerable civil
discontent and some rioting in the early 1960s, pro-
tests on the scale of the 1970 Polish riots have never
been reported in the Soviet Union.

16. The 1976 contraction in meat supplies, how-
ever, will be unusually severe. Regime promises
have aroused expectations among consumers who
themselves have become increasingly aware of
higher living standards abroad. Moreover, the re-
gime has done little so far to prepare consumers
for the coming shortages. Morale will undoubtedly
sag and tensions will grow during the next few
months, reaching a peak in late spring and early
Page-13
SECRET.

summer when shortages of livestock products will
be most severe. Disturbances could well occur, es-
pecially if an equitable form of rationing—formal
or informal—is not enacted. The regime’s control
mechanisms are adequate for their tasks, but a
Pervasive malaise is likely.

17. The USSR probably will purchase only lim-
ited quantities of additional grain for delivery be-
tween January and June 1976, because grain already
ordered will largely occupy port capacity of roughly
3 million tons per month. Logistical constraints
might be eased to a small degree, however, if
grain is transshipped to the Soviet Union via West
European ports by rail and coastal vessel. Addi-
tional purchases of grain for delivery after June
are likely. Prior to October (when the Soviet-US
deal goes into effect) Moscow probably intends to
buy directly from the US only if it cannot find
supplies elsewhere.

Growth in 1976

18. GNP growth in 1976 will be smaller than
usual. Even if favorable weather provides a sub-
stantial expansion in crop production, growth in
overall agricultural production will at best be
slight, since both meat output and livestock inven-
tories will be depressed. Moreover, in the after-
math of last year’s crop failure, growth in indus-
trial output, investment, and consumption will pro-
ceed at record or near record lows.

19. The roughly 9-percent rebound in farm out-
put for 1976 projected in the Five Year Plan appears
optimistic even with good weather. Even with the
improvement in feed supplies that such weather
would bring, production of meat will drop in 1976
and cannot expand. substantially until livestock
herds are built up again. This takes time—a year
or so for pigs, but several years for cattle. Thus
the deterioration in the quality of the Soviet diet
will persist beyond 1976.

20. The Soviets are planning a 4%-percent rise
in industrial output in 1976, the lowest target since
World War II. Problems in bringing new plant and
equipment into operation contribute to the low goal,
but a shortage of agricultural raw materials from
the 1975 crop for the food processing and soft
goods industries is a principal constraint. Growth
in investment is slated to proceed at the slowest

pace (4 percent) since 1968. The Plan emphasizes
the reduction’ of the vast amount of capital tied
up in uncompleted investment projects, Meanwhile,
the sag in food consumption will not be offset by
acceleration in other consumer goods and services.

Foreign Trade and Payments Policy in 1976

21. Grain imports will be the main cause of the
hard-currency deficit on the order of $3-5 billion
that we project for 1976, Imports of grain con-
tracted for in 1975 will cost at least $3 billion or
more in 1976, and further purchases could boost
Soviet imports another $1 billion, as these higher
grain imports should far outweigh cutbacks in
non-grain purchases. Another $1 billion might be
spent for meat. (The five-year grain agreement will
not per se affect the USSR’s hard currency balance
over the longer term since the amounts involved
are about what the Soviets would expend in any
case. )

22. The size of the 1976 hard-currency trade
deficit will depend largely upon Moscow’s ability
to expand exports to the West, where sluggish eco-
nomic recovery continues to be a constraining force.
The USSR, as a result, may have to resort to sub-
stantially more borrowing in 1976. With its. solid
credit rating, Moscow will have no difficulty in
attracting: loans, but it would prefer not to pay
high interest rates on massive short-term loans,
wishing to retain its flexibility in the event of fur-
ther agricultural failures. In any event, the Soviets
will end 1976 with an external debt that is sub-
stantially higher—although still within manageable
limits.

23. We believe the Soviets will continue to sell
gold as they did through most of 1975, despite the
decline from the record gold price of $197.50 per
ounce in 1974 to the current level of around $130.
Unless the Soviet hard-currency trade position im-
proves substantially, sales could approximate 200
tons—worth more than $800 million at today’s
prices. Moscow could sell even more without dis-
turbing its reserves and probably will if the price
is right.

24. While equipment purchases contracted in
previous years will keep 1976 imports high, Moscow
is apparently reducing its planned cash expendi-
Page-14
SECRET

tures. This effort will have little immediate effect on
Soviet industrial production because of the long
delivery periods for most machinery. We regard
current attempts to reduce imports as temporary.
There is no indication that the USSR's longer-term
policy of increasing imports. of high-technology
Western products has changéd. Because of current
hard-currency stringencies, however, the availabil-
ity of attractive financing will be an increasingly
important factor in’ determining where equipment
orders are placed. US firms will be especially af-
fected because US industrial exports to the USSR
are financed primarily by high-interest credits,
While US Eximbank facilities are desirable to the
Soviets, even if they were available US leverage
would be limited by continuing Soviet ability to
get most, if not all, needed equipment abroad under
long-term low-interest credits. Thus current Soviet
financial difficulties do not increase US bargaining
advantages.

Impact of Another Crop Failure

25. It is premature to predict even roughly the
size of the 1976 grain crop. Because spring growing
conditions are so important, it will be at least mid.
July before reliable estimates can be made. Winter
rains normally account for roughly one third of
grain production. Unusually low temperatures and
inadequate snow cover in December threatened
most of the USSR’s fall-sown grain crops. Since
then, snow cover has elie winterkill danger
in much of the winter gr: The areas where
pre-winter development of seedlings was severely
retarded by the 1975 drought continue to be vulner-
able, however. These regions, which usually account
for one third of winter grain production, have not

- yet recovered from last summer's drought. The low
soil moisture also will inhibit the growth of lower-
yielding spring grains that will be planted to replace
winterkilled sowings. Moreover, low soil moisture
reserves in several major spring grain areas presage
Poor sowing conditions in May. More precipitation
than normal will therefore be essential for average
or better yields,

   

 

26. If above-average. weather conditions enable
the Soviets to harvest considerably more than the
roughly 175 million tons of grain needed for mini-
mum domestic requirements (say 195-200 million
tons) they can: (a) increase the weight of animals

being marketed, (b) begin the slow process of re-
building livestock herds, and (c) start to replenish
carry-over grain stocks. If the harvest merely meets
minimum needs, expansion of herds would be post-
poned.

27. Another harvest failure would force further
large reductions in livestock numbers and additional
massive imports of grain from hard-currency areas,
worsening the large trade deficit anticipated in
1976. In turn, this might force the USSR to make
substantial cutbacks in non-agricultural imports
from the US and other hard-currency areas to avoid
rapid build-up of foreign debt.

28. The Soviet consumer would face another re-
duction in. meat supplies, erasing the gains made
under Brezhnev. As the meat queues lengthened,
the leadership would have to decide whether formal
rationing should be substituted for the hit-and-miss
distribution resulting from the queues. Alterna-
tively, Moscow could raise meat prices to avoid the
administrative costs of rationing or the unfairness of
a first-come, first-served system. The regime, how-
ever, has repeatedly indicated that it will avoid
boosting food prices.

29. For the US, another poor Soviet harvest
would mean additional grain sales over and above
the 6 million tons the USSR is committed to buy
from us annually during 1976-80. This would prob-
ably lead the Soviets to reduce their purchases and
contracts for other Western goods unless foreign
demand for Soviet hard currency exports picks up.

IV. LONGER-TERM PROSPECTS
Longer-Term Economic Outlook

30. If average weather prevails over the next
few years, GNP should grow by 4 to 5 percent
per year. The recently published guidelines for the
Tenth Five Year Plan (1976-80) indicate no major
shifts in the allocation of resources. The regime
recognizes, that while past development relied
heavily on rapid growth in the labor force and the
stock of plant and equipment, the USSR can no
longer sustain “extensive” development of this kind.
Instead, the new Plan emphasizes that future
growth will depend mainly on “intensive” develop-
ment—in other words, rapid productivity gains.
For the first time in the history of Soviet planning,
Page-15
SECRET

outlays for investment are to grow more slowly
than GNP—4% percent versus 5 percent (average
annual). Since inputs of man-hours and the stock
of plant and equipment are slated to grow at less
than three quarters the average rate for 1971-75,
the regime is counting on marked efficiency in-
creases in the use of labor and capital. The tech-
nical progress required for these gains, however, is
not ensured by any new proposals to address
chronic problems in the Soviet economy.

— Although one impediment to a speedier in-
troduction of new technology in the USSR is
organizational, a more fundamental obstacle
is political. Party thinking opposes truly rad-
ical changes that might threaten its right of un-
limited control, while the ministerial apparatus
opposes lesser reforms out of its own bureau-
cratic interests.

— An alternative source of technical progress—
imports of capital equipment from the West—
will be crucial for Soviet plans in certain key
sectors. Nevertheless—as in the past—the con-
tribution of foreign technology to growth in
1976-80 will not be extensive. Soviet industry
is slow to get foreign technology into opera-
tion and even slower to spread it throughout
a given industry. Moreover, given its reluc-
tance to go deeply into debt, the USSR is un-
likely to import enough plant and equipment
to make a major impact across the board.

—To achieve even a moderate boost in produc-
tivity, the active cooperation of the labor force
is needed. Soviet workers, never noted for dis-
cipline or motivation, are unlikely to improve
their performance in the face of a slower
growth of personal consumption.

Soviet Need for US Grain

31. Even if the grain harvests in the next several
years are average or moderately above average,
the Soviets will have to import from the West more
than the 6-8 million tons per year stipulated in
the US-USSR grain agreement. If the Soviets needed
as much as 25 million tons per year, they could be
expected to first take the 8 million tons from the
US and exhaust non-US supplies of 10-15 million
tons and then return to the US for their remaining
needs. The demand for US grain depends on the

size of the Soviet requirement and on production
prospects in supplier countries; both conditions are
impossible to predict accurately. Particularly over
the longer term—and especially of the US-Soviet
agreement were abrogated’ or not renewed—the
US share of the USSR’s grain purchases could be
considerably reduced if the Soviets are willing to
develop the markets of smaller exporting countries.
The Soviets could shift the pattern of their imports
toward non-US suppliers, perhaps with the help of
long-term contracts with Cariada, Argentina, or
Australia. These countries are amenable to such
contracts with the Soviets at world prices.

32. How will Soviet foreign policy be affected by
the USSR’s reliance upon the US for grain imports?
While its chronic agricultural problems will exert *
some moderating effect on Soviet calculations about
adventurist foreign activity, Moscow probably be-
lieves that it need not take this factor into much
account in specific situations, reasoning that:

— it is already entitled to buy up to 8 million tons
per year;

— US ability to exert leverage is limited, since
US farm. and free trade interests will oppose
any attempt to limit sales—by, for example,
the maritime unions—in reaction to unwanted
Soviet behavior, and any governmental con-
trols are likely to be short-lived;

—in the short run, other countries will provide
additional amounts; .

—over the longer run, the Soviets could expect
to shift the pattern of their imports toward
other suppliers; and

—in extreme circumstances, substantial belt-
tightening is possible, and this is the likely
reaction of. the leadership to overt foreign
pressures.

Soviet behavior to date on such particulars as
Jewish emigration and Angola suggests that the
leadership feels no need to accommodate US con-
cerns because of its current reliance on US grain.
At most, these imports supplement the other in-
terests which commend to the USSR the posture of
detente and attempts to improve bilateral relations
with the US along the lines of recent years. Thus
the theoretical US advantage will be difficult to

secre.
Page-16
SEERER

apply in practice without arousing an obdurate
Soviet backlash.

33. But matters could get worse for Moscow. A
disastrous harvest in 1976 or 1977 would create
import needs that only the US could satisfy. On

‘occasions when the USSR wants to exceed the 8

million ton level of the five-year agreement, it will
probably judge that it should avoid threatening or
highly offensive behavior in other arenas for a
time. And if the bilateral detente relationship came
under serious challenge, either in the USSR or in
the US, the advantages of the grain arrangement
would be one of the significant arguments in Mos-
cow in favor of keeping that relationship on an
even keel and promoting mutual interests. In sum,
we judge that Soviet reliance upon US grain im-
ports will normally have only a limited moderating
effect on the USSR’s international behavior but
that it will have a greater effect in times when the
economic situation is parlous or the bilateral re-
lationship is threatened.

Longer-Term Outlook for Agriculture

34. With the exception of livéstock goals, plans
for agriculture have not been revamped in the wake
of the 1975 harvest. Previous harvest failures have
usually resulted in plans to increase the emphasis
on agricultural inputs, but these are currently
scheduled to grow at sharply reduced rates in the
next five years, The main features of the plan were
probably worked out some time ago, perhaps as
early as 1974, when a 35 billion ruble program to
upgrade the non-black soil zone was unveiled. At
that time, planners were euphoric following two
record years for agriculture, and evidently hoped
to live off the benefits of a decade of very large
expansion of agriculture resource base. :

35. This planning lag seems to be the reason why
investment in agriculture is now planned to grow
at an average annual rate of only 3% percent
(Table 2), while the rate of increase in the other
sectors of the economy is planned at 5 percent.
At these rates, agriculture’s share of total investment
would slip slightly in 1976-80 although continuing
to soak up somewhat more than one fifth of total
investment.

36. We suspect that the modesty of the goals for
additional resource allocation to agriculture stem

 

 

 

Table 2
USSR: SELECTED INPUTS IN AGRICULTURE
1966-80
Average Annual Rates of Growth
(Percent)
Actual Plan
1966-70 1971-75 1976-80
Total Investment .. . - 9 10 3%
Deliveries of: :
Tractors .7 2% 1
Trucks ... . We 11% 2
Agricultural Machinery .. 6% 13 6%
Delivery of Fertilizer ..... lL 10% 9%

from the unwillingness of the leadership to sponsor
grand new programs until the full effect of the
1975 harvest shortfall can be assessed. However,
some short-run adjustments are likely. Already,
some republic leaders are questioning the planned
pattern of investment for farms, specifically, the
wisdom of continuing to build large-scale livestock
complexes without first ensuring an adequate feed
base. In addition, some middle-level planners, who -
last spring wrote bullish articles about farm achieve-
ments during. the past decade, have recently
changed their tune and now stress that agriculture
will continue to need the help of other sectors in
order to move ahead.

37. Although some adjustments will probably be
made, Moscow’s choices during the next five years
are few, The regime is already encouraging agri-
culturé’s private sector to produce more. About one
quarter of total agricultural output, including one
fifth of the crops—mostly potatoes, fruits, and
vegetables—as well as one third of the livestock
products, comes from private producers, The long-
run policy toward this sector has-been constrictive,
but restrictions have been temporarily relaxed after
bad harvests. In‘the past, output in the private
sector has been easily spurred by supplying more
livestock and feed to individuals, reducing taxes,
lowering barriers to the use of public lands, and
allowing some urban residents to own livestock. The
current leadership is familiar with this process;
when farm production stagnated in 1965, the Brezh-
nev regime immediately turned to the private sector.
Private livestock holdings rose 13% percent in that
year, and by 1966, total acreage and livestock
holdings in the private sector were up 7% percent
Page-17
SEGRE

and 15 percent, respectively, from 1964 levels,
while output increased 7 percent.

38. Currently planned investment is largely de-
signed to save farm labor. If the Soviets shifted
over now to emphasizing increased output, they
might. transfer some resources, for example, from
construction of automated livestock feeders to pro-
duction of traditional agricultural machinery. But
in order to increase substantially the deliveries
of agricultural machinery a complex changeover

> to a second shift or addition of new production
capacity would be required. Given lags in construc-
tion and commissioning of new capacity—as well
as the competition from similar projects such as the
Kama truck plant and the Baikal-Amur mainline
tailroad for funds to buy capital equipment—build-
ing would have had to start years ago in order to
bring this capacity on line during 1976-80. No
program was started.

39. Planned farm output goals for 1976-80
can not be achieved without better-than-average
weather during the next few years. Grain produc-
tion plans have not been revised. Production must
significantly exceed the 1950-75 trend in order
to meet the five-year plan target for an annual
average grain harvest of 215-220 million tons. The
frequency of weather-related crop shortfalls in the
past—notably 1963, 1965, 1972, and 1975—sug-
gests that one or perhaps two of the next five years
will be unfavorable, making fulfillment of the grain
production plan unlikely. (Annexes A and B dis-
cuss the fundamental reasons for Soviet agricultural
difficulties and the USSR's technological efforts to
overcome them.) i—_

40. Meat output ‘targets have been altered but
remain ambitious. The five year average for meat
production is slated at about 15% million tons,
slightly above the level achieved in 1975. Given
the 1975 setback—which we estimate will result
in 1976 meat production of about 12 million tons—
this will require a staggering 12-percent average
annual increase in meat output during the re-
mainder of the five-year plan period. With do-
mestic feed supplies questionable, the Soviets will
be forced to rely on continuing substantial imports
of grain to meet the plan for livestock products.

The Political Outlook

41. On the political front, effects of the 1975
harvest disaster have not yet surfaced. The weather
rather than individuals has been blamed for cur-
rent economic problems, although the possibility
remains that a scapegoat will be offered up from
the second echelon of leaders. Characteristically,
the Brezhnev regime has allowed little public dis-
cussion, let alone debate, about causes and remedies
for its farm problems and doubtless intends to hold
to this course at the Party Congress in February.

42. Nevertheless, questions about agriculture’s
priority and administrative organization have long
stirred disputes among the Soviet leadership. Pe-
riodic stimulation of the private sector has been
necessary but remains idedlogically unpalatable.
Some leaders surely feel that a weaker resource
commitment to agriculture exposes the country to
unnecessary risks. Others in the regime may be
convinced that projected allocations for agriculture
will sustain rapid increases in output with the re-
turn of normal weather. If there’is another crop
failure in 1976 or 1977, established agricultural
priorities and perhaps even organizational forms
would be challenged. Great pressures would be
generated for immediate and large remedial pro-
grams for agriculture. 7

43. The senior echelon of the Politburo—Brezh-
nev and those of his age group—are sufficiently
well entrenched to suryive the 1975 harvest. But
this group's record on other policy fronts is mixed,
and its cohesion is likely to weaken as age takes
its toll on individual members in the next several
years. A bumper harvest in 1976 would repair its
reputation, but conversely another failure, follow-
ing on a spring and summer of exasperating short-
ages, would further reduce its prestige and probably
its cohesion as well, These circumstances would
lend more urgency to the succession process in
Moscow and also, by posing the agricultural issue
in a critical form, increase the chances of faction-
alism and competition in that process.

V. IMPACT ON MILITARY PROGRAMS

44. In the past, no slackening of key military
programs has been noted following crop failures.
The poor harvests of the early 1960s occurred in
the midst of the first major build-up of Soviet stra-
Page-18
SECRET

tegic weapons. Similarly, the poor harvest of 1972
came at a time when the Soviets were preparing
a number of new strategic missiles for production
and deployment, and there is little to indicate
these efforts were affected.

45. The Five Year Plan suggests that the mili-
tary establishment will remain insulated from the
effects of last year’s harvest. The resource commit-
ment to agriculture appears weakened if anything,
with growth in investment in farm machinery down
from its former rapid pace. Although the available
data do not permit precise estimates of defense
outlays, it appears that the plan allows for a rise
in expenditures for military and space programs.

Vi. IMPLICATIONS FOR EASTERN EUROPE

46. The Soviets normally supply roughly half of
Eastern Europe's grain imports. As crop conditions
deteriorated last summer, the USSR canceled grain
deliveries to these clients, forcing them to seek grain
in the West. As a result, East European grain im-
ports from the West in FY 1976 probably will be
on the order of 10-11 million tons, well above
the average of recent years. Some 7 million tons
are likely to come from the United States. Moscow's
cancellation of deliveries has raised doubts in some
East European countries concerning Soviet reli-
ability as a future source of grain, giving them ad-
ditional excuse to shift economic arrangements from
East to West. Poland, for example, tentatively ar-
ranged with the US in late November for annual
imports of possibly 2-3 million tons of grain for
at least the next five years. The Czechs and East
Germans, the other major grain importers in Eastern
Europe, may try to make similar arrangements with
Western suppliers.

47. Despite the fact that Moscow has been taking
a generally tough line in its economic dealings with
Eastern Europe, it will have to be careful not to
push its allies too hard to gain short-term relief for
itself. The East Europeans are already suffering
from the impact of Western inflation and Soviet
price hikes, and in most countries the people have
been told that some belt-tightening is in order.
Indeed, some shortages of consumer goods have
already been reported, as have instances of in-
creased consumer grumbling. In this atmosphere,
it is unlikely that the East European regimes will

allow shortages of basic foods to persist or to spread
at a time when they are under strong economic
Pressures to raise the prices on some consumer
goods.

48. We do not anticipate major shifts in eco-
nomic priorities that would permit the East Euro-
pean regimes to maintain their recent impressive
growth rates of living standards, despite their re-
cently reiterated public commitments on that score.
We expect instead a continuing “consumer alert”
by the regimes, with reactions to potential or actual
disruptions tailored to the immediate problem. Re-
actions thus far have followed this pattern. In
February and June 1975, for example, when demon-
strations occurred in Poland over meat shortages,
Party leader Gierek reacted by importing more meat
and by drawing down stocks slated for export to
the West. Similarly, Romania's Ceausescu in Octo-
ber 1975 ordered a speed-up of deliveries of food
and consumer durables to distribution centers, fol-
lowing reports of consumer resentment over short-
ages in a number of areas. °

49. The need to pay hard currency for grain
normally imported from the USSR will further
strain the balance of payments of the importing
countries—mainly East Germany and Poland. Such
imports will not be a major element in the re-
gion’s overall hard-currency deficit in 1976, how-
ever. The cost of additional deliveries of grain is
estimated at about $500 million in 1976, but the
total deficit in that year may well match the record
1975 deficit of $7 billion. The reasons for the
deficit in 1975 and the anticipated 1976 deficit
are poor export performance resulting from a) the
Western recession and the diversion of some ex-
ports to the USSR to pay for higher priced Soviet
commodities and b) substantial imports of Western
capital goods, many of which have price tags in-
creased by the inflation in the West.

50. With another large deficit expected in 1976,
the Eastern European countries might opt to sub-
stantially reduce imports of capital goods from the
West. There is little evidence of this happening to
date. The regimes will strive to avoid this, since
in the longer run a major reduction in such im-
ports would jeopardize growth in Eastern Europe.
Some shift away from capital goods in favor of
larger supplies of agricultural commodities and
Page-19
SECRET

raw materials from the non-Communist world is
Possible, especially if the Eastern Europeans be-
lieve that they cannot depend on the USSR for
the latter. It is unlikely, however, that the Soviets
will permit any accelerated redirection of East
European trade toward the West. This will be a
persistent dilemma for both the Soviets and East
Europeans.

51. A shift to the West for imports of agricul-
tural commodities could mean larger US sales, de-
pending on East European preferences for suppliers.
Since the US is not a major supplier of capital
goods to Eastern Europe, any associated cutback
in this category of imports would have little effect
on US exports to Eastern Europe.
Page-20
Annex A

AGRICULTURE IN THE SOVIET UNION

1. Agriculture in the USSR faces severe environ-
mental limitations. Because three fourths of the
sown area is climatically comparable to the Prairie
Provinces of Canada and the Northern Great Plains
area in the United States, the farmland of the
USSR is less productive on the average than that
of the United States. Even with a larger area (210
million hectares/520 million acres) under crops,
production is less. Moreover, although like these
North American regions the USSR has had a long
history of wide cyclical swings in weather condi-
tions, the fluctuation in Soviet grain yields is con-
siderably greater. Improved farming practices,
which have dampened such fluctuations in North
America, have not been adopted in the USSR.

2. As in analogous areas in North America, the
Soviet Union's agricultural land is relatively lack-
ing in adequate amount of heat, moisture, and
nutrients. More than 30 percent of the USSR is
too cold for agriculture, and an additional 40 percent
is so cold that only hardy, early-maturing crops can
be grown. Only in the southem USSR does the
available warmth permit a wide range of crops.

3. Moisture deficiency is also a major problem.
Although drought-resistant varieties of plants are
being developed and dry-farming techniques im-
proved, the most effective response to moisture
deficiency remains the age-old technique of irriga-
tion. However, irrigation requires large amounts of
both capital and labor, and in some areas benefits
are difficult to sustain because of soil deterioration.

4. The Soviet Union has some comparatively
good soils, but natural soil fertility supplies only a
part of plant nutrient requirements. Good matching
of soil and crop, skillful crop rotation practices,
and large quantities of organic and mineral fer-
tilizers and of trace elements are necessary.

5. Not only are there differences between the
environmental and technological resources of the
United States and the USSR; institutional differ-
ences are also vast. The collectivization of agricul-
ture in the USSR has resulted in the division of
farm organization into two sectors—the socialized
sector, which consists of state and collective farms
and which accounts for three fourths of agricultural
production; and the private sector, which consists
of small private garden plots that account for the
remainder of total farm output. The socialized sec-
tor is chronically afflicted with lack of motivation -
and responsibility.

6. Soviet agricultural output was about 70 percent
of the US level in 1960. Since that time the dollar
value of Soviet output has increased by about 35
percent and by the early 1970s stood at about
three fourths of US production. However, Soviet
farm output is still dominated by breadgrains and
potatoes—the USSR normally produces about twice
as much wheat as the United States but only 7
percent as much com—while output of higher
quality foods, particularly meat and fruits, lags
far behind that of the United States and is patently
inadequate to satisfy the growing demands of the
Soviet consumer. 7

7. Agricultural production is generally sufficient
to provide consumers with enough to eat in terms
of daily calories, but their diet is heavily weighted
with starches and deficient in meat, vegetables, and
fruit. Per capita consumption of meat and other
quality foods in the Soviet Union is still markedly”
less than in other industrialized countries, As dis-
posable incomes increase on an already determined
schedule, consumer demand for meat rises about
proportionately. Production of meat and other live-
stock products has not yet kept up with this grow-
Page-21
SEGRE

ing demand, and shortages are endemic. Imports
of agricultural commodities even during years of
abundant harvests indicate the determination of the
leadership to upgrade the Russian diet.

8. The USSR employs a farm labor force more
than eight times the size of that in the United

States on 50 percent more cultivated land. But in
the USSR one farm worker feeds seven, while in
the United States he feeds 50. The USSR maintains
more than one fourth of its labor force in agricul-
ture, by far the largest share among industrialized
nations; the United States employs only 5 percent...
of its labor force in agriculture.
Page-22
Annex B

PROBLEMS IN SOVIET AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY

1. Basic weaknesses in agricultural management
and organization are being compounded by a lack
of success in fields of importance to any real and
lasting advances in agricultural productivity, espe-
cially: .

— The assimilation of foreign agricultural tech-

nology.

—The development of new wheat and other
crop varieties.

Agricultural Technology

2. Although agriculture’s share of total invest-
ment will not change significantly during the pres-
ent Five Year Plan, total spending will rise by
one fifth. Part of the money will be spent in the
West, particularly the US, to pay for a wide variety
of advanced agricultural technology and equip-
ment. Large amounts will be spent on developing
improved varieties of crops, on improved fertilizers
and methods of application, on other agricultural
chemicals, on soil conservation and moisture re-
tention, and on irrigation and drainage projects.
Highest priority will go to machines for growing,
harvesting, storing, and processing crops, mechani-
cal and engineering aspects of large-scale animal
operations, fertilizer plants, and the technology
and equipment needed for huge irrigation and
drainage projects.

3. Major agricultural items already delivered, or
in the process of being acquired, include:

— Technology and equipment for self-propelled
forage harvesters at an estimated cost of $450
million, plus a factory capable of producing
20,000 such machines per year.

— Technical assistance, licensing agreements,
and plants for the production of tractors and
trucks based on US models.

17

— Up to 40 manure recycling complexes incor-
porating a new process for the production of
an urea-based animal feed.

— Fifteen alfalfa processing plants, worth $2
to $3 million each, with licensing, rights to
build an additional 100 to 200.

—A number of prototype feedlots, which will
then be duplicated on a large scale.

—A 20-year, $20-billion deal involving plants
for the manufacture of ammonia and phos-
phoric acid.

— Licenses and technology for the construction
of chemical complexes to produce US trade-
name pesticides.

——A.-wide range of US technology and equip-
ment for a multi-billion dollar land reclama-
tion program with emphasis on irrigation.

4. Improvements in Soviet agricultural tech-

nology will be slow. The USSR’s record on the as-
similation of foreign technology has not been good.
Insufficient autonomy and incentives for farm
managers and workers and inefficient administra-
tion of farm research will continue to be significant
impediments to any dramatic improvement in So-
viet agricultural output.

Wheat Problems

5. The Soviets normally produce roughly one
fifth of the world’s wheat, as much as twice the
US output, but they still suffer from a shortage
of high-quality wheat. The inadequacies of the
varieties available:

— Keep down the yields the Soviets might other-
wise achieve through greater use of fertilizer,
mechanization, drainage, irrigation, pest con-
trol, and other improved cultivation practices.
Page-23
SECRET

— Slow the rate of yield increases and thus limit
the Soviet ability to produce the quantities of
grain needed for livestock, a key factor in the
Kremlin’s pledge:to provide more meat, milk,
and eggs.

~— Contribute to wide fluctuations in the Soviet
harvest and cause major disturbances in world
grain markets. :

—Make it difficult to produce good-qualit
bread, still the mainstay of the Soviet diet.

6. The increased use of fertilizer, coupled with
the emergence of new types of rust, have created
a need for new varieties with added characteristics,
New varieties are needed with germplasm different
from present varieties to reduce the risk of large-
scale damage from rust, to respond more vigorously
to the application of fertilizer, to resist lodging and
shattering, and to provide more resistance to other
diseases and . insects. Soviet scientists, gambling
with shortcuts, have not succeeded in developing
any new varieties in the past decade.

7. Although Soviet geneticists have tested a wide
range of US and other foreign varieties, none has
met the special Soviet growing conditions and re-
quirements, except on a very limited scale.

8. A proper breeding program should develop
a set of several varieties, with different genetic
histories, each set capable of substituting for one
of the present widely grown varieties over a wide
area and of outproducing it in some areas. But
even if such varieties are now being tested in ex-

perimental stations, no major improvements could
occur for at least several years; if genetic crosses
from among the wide range of genetic materials
collected from all over the world need to be made,
more than a decade could be required.

Grain Harvesting and Storage Losses

9. The Soviets perennially experience losses of
grain during harvesting and storage. Reports in-
dicate that Soviet grain harvesting combines prob-
ably operate with no less than a 10-percent grain
loss, and losses could range as high as 20 percent.
In comparison, US combines are capable of op-
erating with losses as low as 1 to 3 percent. The
excessive losses of grain which the Soviets incur
during harvesting reflect in part fundamental short-
comings in the design of their combines. Inade-
quate equipment and harvesting methods not only
cause losses of grain but also increase the costs of
harvesting.

10. In the USSR, in bumper years, a large quan-
tity of newly harvested grain has to be stored
temporarily outdoors in uncovered piles because
grain handling, drying, and storage facilities are
inadequate. An estimated 35 million tons were tem-
porarily stored in the open in 1973. Under Soviet
climatic conditions as much as 40 to 60 percent of
freshly harvested grain contains excessive amounts
of moisture and other extraneous materials that
must be removed quickly if spoilage is to be
avoided. Inadequate storage tonditions thus reduce
the quality as well as the amount of grain.
Page-24
b

 

 

Annex C

SOVIET GRAIN BALANCE

J. The increase in Soviet grain production since
1960 has not matched the rising demand for grain.
The result has been an unprecedented level of grain
imports in recent years. Even with these imports,
it is very doubtful that the USSR has been able to
add to grain reserves. Indeed, all evidence—albeit
circumstantial—suggests that substantial reductions
in reserves have occurred over the past few years
and that current imports are being used to meet
needs rather than to pad stocks.

2. Close examination of Soviet data permits a
partial reconstruction of a grain balance relating
domestic production, net imports, and major com-
ponents of consumption. Although the USSR reports
grain production, it does not release information on
the main uses of grain, the amounts lost in trans-
portation and storage, or the size of stocks. Suffici-
ent data exist to make reliable estimates of Soviet
use of grain for seed, food, industrial products, and
net imports. Data on which to base estimates of
grain fed to livestock—which in 1975 will amount
to two thirds of the domestic crop—are much less
satisfactory; these are far less accurate than esti-
mates for other uses. While the data do not permit
us to make estimates of the size of grain stocks, they
are believed to be sufficient to detect significant
shifts in grain allocation.

The Supply of Grain

3. Production: Grain production in the USSR in-
creased more than 75 percent between 1960 and the
record harvest year of 1973, The increase was partly
the result of better seed varieties, improvement in
planting and harvesting practices, the use of more
fertilizer and farm machinery, and a 10-percent
increase in sown area. The overall trend in output
has been obscured by large year-to-year changes.
For example, the crop in 1973, a year of favorable
weather, was three-fifths larger than the drought-
stricken 1975 crop.

 

4. As production has climbed, its composition
has changed; in particular, feedgrains have received
far greater attention.

— Barley, the share of which rose from 13 per-
cent of total production in 1960 to 28 percent
in 1974, has been stressed because it generally
has higher yields than other grains.

— Oats and com, which fell into disfavor earlier,
are making a comeback.

Nevertheless, traditional breadgrains still account
for nearly three fifths of production.

— Wheat, lower-yielding spring wheat and
higher-yielding winter wheat, comprises about
one half of total grain production. Although
wheat is used primarily for food, as much as
one third of the total wheat crop has been used
as livestock feed in recent years.

— Rye remains important because of the Russian
fondness for rye breads.

Imports

5. Soviet grain imports have ranged from negligi-
ble amounts in the early 1960s to an estimated 24.7
million tons in FY 1976, For data on yearly imports
and exports since FY 1972, see Table C-1.

Table C-1

USSR: GRAIN TRADE
FY 1973-FY 1976

Thousand Metric Tons

 

FY 1975 FY 1976
FY 1973 FY 1974 (est.) est.)
+ 22,900 10,960 5,690 24,700
5,331 6,988 6,000 1,500

 

3,203 3,546 3,000 500
353 369 350 350
167 433
Page-25
SEEREF

Demand for Grain

6. The demand for grain has grown rapidly in
the USSR as a result of a moderate increase in its
use for food and a sharp expansion in its use as
livestock feed. Indeed, growth in demand has out-
paced production in recent years,

1. Food: The USSR produces ample grain to
feed its population. Even in years of harvest failure,
such as 1975, food requirements consume less than
one half of total production. In the bumper harvest
year of 1973, only one fourth of the grain (60 mil-
lion tons) was used as food.

8. Industrial Raw Materials: One to two percent
of the grain crop is used by industry to make al-
cohol, beer, starch, and syrup.

9. Seed: Each year, 24-28 million tons of grain
are used for seed. Improved yields have lowered
the share of the crop set aside for seed from about
one fifth in the first half of the 1960s to one
seventh in the 1970s. We estimate the quantity of
§rain required for seed from the area planted and
the officially recommended seeding rates, These
“norms” vary according to the type of grain but
seem high compared with Westem practice. Fluctu-
ations ini the amount of grain used for seed result
partly from minor shifts in cropping patterns and
partly from the varying amounts of reseeding neces-
sary each year because of winterkill- :

10. Exports: A small and declining share of So-
viet grain is exported. Wheat accounts for the bulk
of exported grain, and most of it goes to Eastern
Europe and to Cuba. The Soviets have apparently
decided that exports to Eastern Europe, previously
believed to be sacrosanct, will be drastically re-
duced in FY 1976 (see Table C-1).

11. Livestock Feed: Estimates of total grain fed
are calculated from official Soviet data on the
quantity of concentrates fed. These data, however,

are not presented by type. From total concentrates.

fed, we deduct the estimated quantities of milling
byproducts, oilseed meals, and alfalfa meal fed,
leaving a residual of grain fed. In contrast to the
estimates for the other uses of grain, grain fed
to livestock is almost certainly overstated by this

20

calculation because the estimates are based on pro-
duction data rather than on standardized, or “pro-
curement,” weight. The difference between produc-
tion and standardized weight is: (a) excess mois-
ture, trash, and dirt, which have no nutritional value,
and (b) weed seeds and grain admixtures, which
may have substantial feed value, particularly in
cases where one grain has grown mixed with
another. Estimates of grain fed to livestock are
therefore adjusted accordingly.

12. The share of the total grain crop fed to
livestock has doubled from an estimated one third
in the early 1960s to two thirds in 1975. With the
higher priority given to the livestock program
under Brezhnev, herds have increased, and grain
fed per animal has risen rapidly. Productivity gains
have not followed suit. Due to poor breeding, un-
balanced rations (too much bulky roughages, in-
sufficient energy and protein feeds), and lack of
Proper management practices, the grain-to-final-
Product ratio in the Soviet Union remains abnor-
mally high.

Grain Balance for Recent Yéars

13. A rough grain balance for FY 1972-1976 is
shown in Table C-2. The difference between total
supply and total requirements is a notional estimate
of additions or deletions from non-strategic grain
stocks, In any event, it gives no clue as to the size

of. strategic. grain reserves, If it is assumed, how-..

ever, that non-strategic reserves were exhausted, or
nearly so, following the bad 1972 harvest, it can
be seen that even the surplus production from the
USSR's record 1973 harvest and this year's massive
imports are not enough to meet demands in FY
1976. In fact, if non-strategic reserves were sub-
stantially larger than we believe, the USSR in
1976 would almost! certainly draw down more
than the 7 million tons shown in Table C-2 so as
to increase the feed allocation closer to the level of
recent years. It is therefore improbable, given the
magnitude of the shortfall and the priority demands
of the livestock sector, that current imports are
being used to build strategic reserves, which are
probably maintained at a predetermined level
based on estimated wartime requirements through
good years and bad.
Page-26
Table C-2

USSR: ESTIMATED SUPPLY AND DEMAND FOR GRAIN
FY 1972-FY 1976

Million Metric Tons

 

 

 

   

Supply Demand Additions or
-—— = Deletions
Grain from Non-
Produc- Total Indus- Total Strategic
Fiscal Year tion! Imports Supply Feed? Food Seed trial ‘Export Demand Stock
149.7 24.4 174.1 $6.3 59.7 25.4 3.0 5.3 180.2 ~6.1
193.0 12.4 210.4 94.9 59.0 27.0 3.2705 191.6 13.3
W742 7.0 181.2 100.0 58.0 27.4 3.04.9 193.31.
1976 preliminary. 124.600 24.7 149.3 72.03 54.0 27.0 2.051865 -7.2

 

 

* Domestic production minus an estimated 3 percent handling loss (transportation and storage) and an estimated $ percent
waste resulting from excess moisture and extraneous matter.

3 Estimated feed consumption less an 11 percent adjustment for handling loss and waste.

? Residual for use as feed. Under normal supply conditions the use of grain for feed would have been on the order of 105-110
million tons.

21
Page-27
=“

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was disseminated by the Central {ntelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the follow-
ing officials within their respective departments:

a.
b.

Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the

Department of the Army

[. Director of Naval tatelligence, far the Department of the Navy
. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air

Force

. Deputy Assistant Administrator for National Security, Energy Research and

Development Administration

|. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
i. Special Assistant to the Secretary for National Security for the Department of

the Treasury

. The DCI’s Deputy for National Intelligence Officers, for any other Depart-

ment or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the DCi’s Deputy for National Intelligence Officers.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, retumed to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested af the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with

1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4, The

‘
title of this document when used separately from the fext should be clas-

sified: FOR-QFFIGHEUEE-GNEK: