
Page-1
Director of -Seeret

Central
4) Intelligence

 

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1999

Implications of Alternative
Soviet Futures

National Intelligence Estimate

This National Intelligence Estimate represents
the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the

US Intelligence Community.

Secret

ME 11-18-91
June 1991

Copy
Page-2
Warning Notice Intelligence Sou

 

   
   
 

Unauthorized Disclosure
Subject to Criminal Sanctions

 

Dissemination Control
Abbreviations

NOFORN (NF)
NOCONTRACT (NC)
PROPIN (PR)
ORCON (OC)

REL...
WN

from CPAS/IMC
(703-482-5203 or secure
3-37108; or AIM request
to userid CPASIMC).

 
  
 

-7177); printed

Not releasable to foreign nationals

Not releasable to contractors or contractor/consultent

Caution—proprietary information involyed

Dissemination and extract formation

controlled by origii

This infgsaeeTion has been authorized for release to...
LY SINTEL— Intelligence sources or methods involved

Classified by 0534769
Declassify: OADR
Derived from multiple sources

 

 

 

is Unclassified.

All material on this page
Page-3
Director of

Intelligence

 

NIE 11-18-91

Implications of Alternative
Soviet Futures

Information available as of 27 June 1991 was used
in the preparation of this National Intelligence Estimate.

The following intelligence organizations participated

in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense Intelligence Agency

The National Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,

Department of State

The Office of Intelligence Support,

Department of the Treasury

The Intelligence Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation

also participating:

The Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for intelligence,
Department of the Army

The Office of the Director of Naval Intelligence,
Department of the Navy

The Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps

This Estimate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board.

—Seeret—
June 1991
Page-4
—
Figure 1
Scenarios for the USSR

Over the Next Five Years

 

 

 

Chronic Crisis

Continuation of current situation

Neither entire collapse of system nor substantial progress toward
resolution of country’s problems

Continued devolution of power below but unable to govern
Political gridlock
Economy would verge on breakdown but somehow manage to limp along

Scenario unlikely to last next five years

 

System Change

System replaced with relatively little violence

Slavic and Central Asian core state: smaller, less militarily powerful,
more pluralistic than USSR

Baltic states, Georgia, Armenia, and Moldova become independent
Economies of all troubled, but moving rapidly toward market

Government increasingly reflects popular will, but may not survive
economic disarray

 

Regression

Hardliners in military, security services, and CPSU impose martial
law type regime

Democratic reform and republic independence drives halted
‘Strong nationalist and reformist pressures remain
Economy's downward spiral accelerates

Scenario unlikely to last long

 

Fragmentation

 

Violent, chaotic collapse of system
Republics become independent

Some governments reflect popular will, others more authoritarian
Warfare within and between many republics

Economic conditions deteriorate dramatically; barter main form of
economic interaction; famine widespread

 

 

 

331225 6-90
Page-5
Key Judgments

 

Implications of Alternative
Soviet Futures

The USSR is in the midst of a revolution that probably will sweep the

Communist Party from power and reshape the country within the five-year

time frame of this Estimate. The outcome of this revolution will be affected

by a number of factors, including the following:

+ A sharply declining economy and standard of li ing that will get worse
for the next few years no matter what economic program is adopted.

+ The difficulties in implementing a market reform program and sustain-
ing it against a likely popular backlash.

* Continued devolution of power to republic and local governments at the
expense of the central government.

* The rising claim of nationalism on defining the state and legitimizing its
policies. .

* The increasing importance of popular expectations and aspirations, and
the government's abilities to meet them, on a wide range of issues—
including living standards and personal freedom.

No one can know what the duration or the ultimate outcome of the
revolution will be—particularly in a society where repression and central-
ized control have been the rule, and the culture has been resistant to
change, but where recently, democratic aspirations appear to have become
widespread.

Of the many conceivable outcomes, we believe four scenarios span the
range of possibilities: a continuation of the current “chronic crisis” with no
political resolution; a relatively peaceful “system change” into a smaller,
more pluralistic and voluntary union in which the central government
relinquishes substantial power; a chaotic and violent “fragmentation” of
the country resulting in many new states with widely varying political and
economic systems; and a “regression” through renewed repression into an
authoritarian state run by a combination of hardliners in the military,
security services, and Communist Party (see figure 1).!

 

‘The approach taken by the Intelligence
Community in this Estimate is intended to
be more speculative, and less predictive,

than in previous estimates on political devel-
opments in the USSR. We focus on a range
of possible outcomes and their implications
for both the USSR and the West, rather
than on current developments. Although the

scenarios we use to describe these outcomes
are very similar to the four used in NIE 11-
18-90 November 1990,
The Deepening Crisis in the USSR: Pros-
pects for the Next Year, they are meant to
be “ideal cases” in order to make the dis-
tinctions between them clear. The reality is
certain to be much more complicated.

—Secrat_

ME 11-18-91
June 1991
Page-6
16-0 erzice ¢-86-0

 

s40y0aJap Jo spuesnoyy,
worsayoo
wun ‘aurdiosip jo umopyearg

Temespuyym Avjap 0} uayealyy
Pinos diyssapeoy ourpiey
suonoayap ul aseasouy

Yo Jaye BuIZIqeysep sAey
Pinom vonenyis jeontod yeusauy

 

ewosajqnosy

9q 0) AJoyt] JOU onssy

: Ayyoinb azow awoy

Way) Burg 0} BUTT 2q pinoj,

Jaua}e—aMs o1WOU0D
ueUaD Joy UsNqel UF Zora
Way} eAowal 0} Jayo pino,

Ayiqeisur Jo ywiod jenusiog

fuvunay uy sai0g

 

Bissnuo|ag
Pue oulesyE Usdisem ‘peisuuyey,
“BAOPIOW J9A0 sayseyo jeNUdIog

APM IAID JO JOAOTTIdS jBNUDIOg
saa8njai Jo sioquinu aalsseyy

O8BI9A9]
SB Salaatjap ABi9ua asn WYSI

edoung wojseg

Tejnau Joy prey ysnd pinoy,
Puejog woy

Temespyyim uo [21s Pinos ing
Apreyyiur usyeoayy 01 ApoyUA,

sasnjonds Ayinses

ueadoing oyu! Aqua ueadoing
seg esoddo jou pjnoay
edoing waiseg pue sajeys mou
snolieA usamyaq sdiysuoleyar
sanesadooo Mau Joy siseg

yeosyy Aly IW ON

edoing wayseq
{es3ndu Joy ysnd 0} anurjuco
PINOM Inq “yeasyy Arep IW ON

adoang wsayseq
paeMoy KaI]og

 

syuswisal8e Sulisixe YIM
souel|dwos ainsua oF e1qeuy

Aotjod yuasayoo ON

Injiqnop

AjBulseosous syuowsesse

Bunsixe 0} a1aype 0} ssousUrl[IA,,
SUIJ9} J91A0g UO JUD

ing ‘suonenosau JoyUa Ys

anss}

UB JOU S}UataeIze 0} soUaJoypy
Ssa90Jd 3urpjing-souapiyuoo

Puke Os}UOD sue FDO uot

0} Yas Pino”, :9 1Wepuadapuy
salweay) uononpal swie
‘BulBues-apim Jo yinsind snosoBiA
19109 ueISY [es]Ue_ pue oAeIS

Alay! syusuise38e 0) sousoypy

ssoi801d ayeoyjdwo0s

P]NoM ssaul|psey jo Aouepuasse:
oypoyed pue Aessesip Suiseesouy
syomouesy

PIO UIYyIIM Inq ‘s}usWOoI8e
Mou Jo jInsind panunuoD

Joujuos suay

 

 

sy
UL paysaa Jamod Arey SOW,
vonenyis

91qeisipaidun ‘snoso3uep

0} pea] pinom suodeam Jeajonu
4840 [ONUOd Jo sso] aIqissod ing

389M 03 ONY)
40 9UIN}DOp Arey JUEZ2YO9 ON

sanuiqedes aalsuayyorajunoo
Uo siseydwia paseaiouy
Awouosa

Bunesoyerep jo syuresjsuoo
Uy ‘ySueNs Are
T9IAOG UlEIUIEUI OF Yeas Pino

sIOQUSi9U []BUIS 0} AJUO IROIy) &
SsopeN|IW [feWg :9 jUopuadapuy
auls0p ,2AIsuajep,,

Uo siseydwa paseoioul ‘yomod
srodns Jeajonu urewar pjnoa
‘AsBU [IW paonpas ApUesyrUsIS
10109 URIS [BI1U9D pur dAzIg

Paurejuew sund0p ,oa1suajoq,,
synd sadaap 0} pray

Pinos AWouosa BuNBIONaIEq
sanmigedes Arey

Ur! Uoronpas [enpess panunuoD

aanysod Are WA,

 

SouRjsIsse o1WOUODa pue
Aseqijiuy ‘San asojo yeas pjnom
ACME YeOIg VY} SuOIZeI pur
soliqndas ul syuauiuseAos Auepy

Adtjod juasayoo oN

aourlsisse

d1uousa yedxe JOU Pino
uoneyuoyuos

PIOA® 0} Yes Pjnom yng ‘Ie

Ayjeuontpuos ydacoe

pue jUowlesesua/aouRsisse
o1woUDDa yaes pInom
sainjonas Anos uesdoing
Ur UOIsnpoUt ‘uoHEpoWWOD0e
a[e9s-[]nj yaas Pino”,

Aypeuonyipuos

wos ydaooe pue jusWasesus
/2dURISISSE O1WIOUODA YDaS [IIA
Adiod onei9 A[sulseasout

nq ‘uonepowuos.y

1S9A4 24)

 

 

 

uopeuausery

 

Uojssalgay

 

asueyy waysks

 

S{sH1Q ayuoryg

 

sopeuasg

preaoy AoyJoq

  

Sanss] fay 10)
Sopeuarg Jo suojeatdwy
7 analy
Page-7
This Estimate’s focus is on the content and implications rather than on the
relative probabilities of such scenarios. The USSR could pass through any
or all of these scenarios during the next five years. Nevertheless, we believe
that, on the basis of current trends and our assessment of the critical
variables—particularly the bleak prospects for the economy—the country
is much more likely to be in a “system change” or “fragmentation”
scenario five years from now than to remain where it is today in “chronic
crisis.” In our view, an attempt to impose the hardline regime of the
“regression” scenario becomes more likely as the country verges on
“system change” or “fragmentation,” but, of the four scenarios, this is the
least likely to be a lasting outcome. In any event, we believe that the USSR
in its present form will not exist five years from now.

There will be profound effects on the geopolitical balance in Eurasia
whatever the outcome. “System change,” the most favorable scenario for
the USSR and the West, would leave the USSR somewhat smaller than it
is today and still a nuclear superpower, but this Slavic-Central Asian state
would have adopted a political and economic system much more conducive
to close ties to the West. Even so, the difficulties associated with such a
transformation over the-longer term may be too heavy a burden for the
government and population to bear.

The geopolitical shift would be most drastic in a “fragmentation” scenario,
where the country broke apart in a chaotic fashion. Some form of a
Russian or Russian-dominated state would eventually emerge out of the
chaos, but for a good many years it would be a far less influential actor on
the world scene than today’s Soviet Union, and it would be bordered by
many new countries of varying stability and military strength.

The ability of Western governments to influence the course of events inside
the USSR is likely to grow in the “chronic crisis” and “system change”
scenarios and in the aftermath of a “fragmentation” scenario:

+ The country’s crumbling economy will increase the likelihood that any
government, except one led by hardliners, will turn to the West for aid
and accept some degree of economic and political conditionality in
return. The need for such aid would give most national and republic
leaders an incentive to avoid repressive measures.

.

Even though the upper limits of what the West might realistically offer
would fall far short of the country’s total capital needs, such aid could

play an important role in moving the country toward “system change”;
that is, the transition toward a market economy and a more pluralistic

Political system.
Page-8
Western assistance could play an important role in the newly indepen-
dent Baltic republics, simply because of their much smaller size. On the
other hand, local and regional instabilities in the Transcaucasus and
Central Asia are likely to limit Western inclination to provide assistance
to these republics.

With the exception of the “system change” scenario, the West would face
major obstacles in actually exerting influence. In a “chronic crisis”
scenario, which the USSR is in today, aid for political and economic
reform would be hard to channel into Projects that would benefit long-term
growth and could get caught in a struggle for power between the center
and the republics, In this, and particularly in the “fragmentation” scenario,
the gathering political and economic disarray would make it more difficult
to determine whom to aid, how to get it to them, and how to follow up to
ensure the aid had its intended effect.

The aftereffects of increased instability or repression would also pose
challenges to the West:

* The East Europeans, the Turks, and the Nordic countries would turn to
the United States and other major Western powers for assistance in
coping with refugees, instability on their borders, or a military-led
government in Moscow.

.

In a “fragmentation” scenario, various factions or republics could gain
access to and control of nuclear weapons and threaten to use them
against internal rivals or other countries. Although any Western involve-
ment would depend on a number of variables, timely Western offers of
assistance in securing and/or disposing of such weapons could have
Pivotal effect.

Seizure of control by hardliners in a “regression” scenario would lead to
an increase in East-West tensions, a greatly diminished interest in arms
control and other negotiations, and a slowing in the reduction in the
capabilities of the Soviet military.

Violence at home could spread to the Soviet troops that are due to remain
in Germany until the end of 1994.

vi
Page-9
Contents

 

 

Page

Key Judgments til
Discussion
Chronic Crisis

Implications for the USSR

Implications for the West
System Change

Implications for the USSR

Implications for the West
Regression

Implications for the USSR

Implications for the West
Fragmentation

Implications for the USSR

Implications for the West

BI [OJIN [Oo [oF [ow Joo |r J [a | Js

vii —Seeret—
Page-10
Discussion

Chronic Crisis

This scenario assumes a continuation of the current
crisis with neither an entire collapse of the system nor
substantial progress toward resolution of the country’s
problems. Gorbachev might manage to hang on to
power in a weakened central government because
neither the left nor the right would have enough
strength to oust him, but, even if he left the scene,
neither side would gain the upper hand. The country
goes from one system-threatening crisis to another.
Despite the turmoil, much backtracking, and political
stalemate at the top, the trend is toward more auton-
omy for the republics and a market-based economy
but in a bottom-up and relatively chaotic way. The
command economy verges on breakdown but some-
how manages to limp along.

Implications for the USSR

The current situation in the USSR is best described
by this scenario. This is a highly unstable scenario.
Although there would be some continued movement
toward a pluralistic system, a voluntary union, and a
market economy, governmental authority would
weaken, and the potential for major popular upheav-
als would grow. It is unlikely this scenario could
prevail for the five years of this Estimate. Indeed, a
transition to one of the other three scenarios of
“system change,” “fragmentation,” or “regression” is
likely earlier rather than later in this period.

If Gorbachev remained in office, he would become
less-and less powerful. Neither the left nor the right
would prevail, but both would remain strong enough
to pose a serious threat to Gorbachev and to each
other. The potential for large-scale intervention into
politics by the security services and the military would
continue to hang over the country. Although less
likely, this scenario could still exist if Gorbachev is
removed constitutionally, decides on his own to step
down, or dies a natural death. Whoever is in charge,
the central government would continue to lose author-
ity, although without Gorbachev this would occur
more quickly.

 

Indicators of “Chronic Crisis”

   
  
    
   
 
  
  

+ Economy continues to deteriorate,
mand economy does not collapse.

Center/republics discussions on economi
stabilization/reform plan drag out without.
resolution (or they agree and'the plan fails):
center pursues ineffective ad hoc policies;
republics try to implement individual 'eco-
nomic Programs.

.

Central governmerit remains viable. but
steadily erodes.

  

Center/republics unable to resolve key differ- '
ences concerning powers af. national and re-
public governments.

 

   

Political polarization grows, but neither right
nor left are strong enough to become
dominant.

 

Violence continues but at relatively low levels;
periodic incidents of regional repression |
occur. 2 eee

 

° Military and security services act more inde~
pendently but shrink from a coup.

 

 

 

The republics would gather a good deal of the author-
ity the center lost but still would not be able to govern
effectively. None would be fully independent, but
many—the Baltic states, Georgia, Armenia, and
Moldova—would remain tethered to the union only
by the continued presence of Soviet troops and the
vestiges of the central command economy. Russia
would gain greater control over its own affairs
Page-11
and increased influence with other republics, but it
would not yet be strong enough to transform the
center to its liking or assume all of the central
government's former authority within the RSFSR.
Yel’tsin’s strength in Russia and the USSR would
grow, at least initially, but he would be hamstrung by
the center’s continuing ability to limit the RSFSR’s
economic sovereignty, by infighting within his own
camp (abetted by the KGB), and by demands of non-
Russians in the republic for greater autonomy or
independence.

With no resolution of the center-republic relationship,
there would be no hope of stabilizing or teversing the
economic slide. GNP would drop dramatically, and
the country would face worsening shortages of indus-
trial materials, consumer goods, and food. Inflation
and unemployment would skyrocket; strikes would
proliferate. Significant human suffering would de-
velop in some areas. Forcign credits would dry up as
the country failed to meet debt service payments;
Western companies—scared off by the growing politi-
cal and economic chaos—would take their business
elsewhere. Nevertheless, the economy would avoid
collapse through a major expansion of independent
arrangements and barter deals that republics, enter-
prises, and individuals made with each other.

The economic disarray and growing republic auton-
omy would accelerate the trend toward reduced mili-
tary capabilities. The military leadership would try to
ensure that the drop in allocations to the military was
not dramatic, but the trend would still be decidedly
downward because the military economy would not be
insulated from the accelerating decline. The republics’
quest for greater autonomy or independence would
exacerbate the Soviet armed forces’ manpower and
morale problems. Modernization of Moscow’s strate-
gic forces would continue within the limits of a
START treaty, but even these forces would increas-
ingly be affected by the economy’s dismal perform-
ance.

Implications for the West

In this scenario, the ability to conduct foreign policy
by whoever leads the central Soviet government would
be constrained by the turmoil at home. Western
governments would find Gorbachev or a successor not

only preoccupied by the domestic crisis but also less

and less able to ensure that the USSR is capable of

fulfilling the foreign commitments it makes. Never-
theless, any Soviet regime in this scenario probably
would still seek accommodation on a range of interna-
tional issues and almost certainly would want to avoid
confrontation. The Soviets would be likely to
continue:

+ Deepening the growing economic and political rela-
tionships with the United States, Western Europe,
and, to a lesser extent, Japan.

+ Negotiating ongoing and new arms control
agreements.

* Cooperating in crafting a new European security
order.

* Reducing military and economic commitments,
while expanding cooperation with the United States,
in the Third World.

Whatever the Soviet Government's intentions, the
economy’s rapidly decreasing ability to support a
massive military, the likely increased involvement of
the Soviet army in quelling domestic unrest, and the
general lack of cohesion within the country would
seriously limit the USSR’s capability to threaten its
neighbors or the West. The Soviet Union would
almost certainly complete its withdrawal of forces
from Eastern Europe, possibly more quickly than
scheduled. The leadership would have every incentive
to adhere to the terms of the CFE and START
treaties and probably would seek further arms reduc-
tions to lighten the military burden on the economy.

In this scenario, Soviet as well as republic interest in
Western economic involvement would continue to
expand rapidly. The deteriorating economy would
ensure that the central government would continue to
seek access to Western economic institutions and be
on the West's doorstep for loans, credits, and general
economic assistance, although it would not be able to
repay such assistance,
Page-12
as interference and could result in attempts by the
central government to block Western assistance to
republics and localities.

System Change

This scenario assumes that the existing political sys-
tem is replaced with relatively little violence. This
occurs with the old regime’s dissolution as a result of
republic or popular pressure—as in Czechoslovakia in
1989—or through agreement between the center and
the republics. In either case, a loose federation or
confederation of the Slavic and Central Asian repub-
lics emerges, and independence is granted to those
republics seeking it. The political and economic sys-
tems that emerge in the core Slavic-Central Asian
state and the independent states vary widely.

Implications for the USSR .

The level of instability in this scenario would depend
on the manner in which the system was changed. If it
collapsed due to internal pressure, the instability
initially would be greater: new governing mechanisms
would have to be created in the midst of revolution,
and many elements of the old system—while defeat-
ed—would remain capable and desirous of complicat-
ing the transition to a new system. A voluntary a
sharing of power by the center would be more stable,
although, even in this variant, the new systems that
emerged from what was the USSR would encounter
problems much more serious than those now being
experienced by post-Communist regimes in Eastern
Europe.

The newly transformed core state that emerges in this
scenario would reflect the political and economic
trends in Russia and, to a lesser extent, in the
Ukraine. As such, it—particularly its Slavic portion—

Special requests for consultations, technical assist- would have, at least initially, a much more pluralistic
ance, emergency aid, and trade from republic and political and economic system than ever before. It

local governments are likely to increase. Without would have a popularly elected parliamentary govern-
political resolution of the conflict over who owns ment with numerous political parties. While the role

resources and controls foreign trade, both US govern- _ of the state would remain large, its authority would
mental and private business relations with the USSR —_ depend much more than heretofore on popular accept-
and its republics will be complicated and harder to ance. The government’s respect for human rights
sustain. Those direct Western contacts with the re-

publics disapproved of by Moscow would be perceived
Page-13
Figure 3
System Change: Loose Federation/Confederation Q
With Some Independent States

   
 

25

   

Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
(R.S.F.S.R.)

Soviet Union

  
     
  

Potential States

(1 Federation/confederation
(consisting of RSFSR, Belorussia, Ukraine Azerbaijan,
‘Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kinghiziya, Turkmeniya,and Tajikistan)

(£2) Independent state
(Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Georgia,and Armenia)

 

 

Contidenté 722381 (545547) 691

would start to resemble that of Western governments. to runa large portion of major industry, and reforms
The Central Asian regions, on the other hand, would would be implemented unevenly in the republics.
remain basically authoritarian and have poor human Progress would be much more gradual and the social
rights records. pain much greater than has been the case in Poland.
The republics would have substantial autonomy, with

the center playing the leading—though even here not Russia's influence in the new union could become a
exclusive—role in foreign, defense, fiscal |/monetary, source of tension. Its leadership, most likely under
and communications/transportation policies. The Yel’tsin, would have played the leading role in creat-
presidency of the new union would have less scope and ing the new system giving greater power to the

be a less powerful office than it is today. There would

be a strong push toward a market economy, although

the central and republic governments would continue
Page-14
alternatively:

   
 
 

  

+ Large-scale public protests, labor unrest, and
republic pressure cause the cent fralgovern- f
ment to collapse.

   
 

 

+ Reformers/republics give up hope of reaching
negotiated settlement with the center and
conclude bilateral and multilateral agree-
ments reserving most powers.to themselves
and defining areas of the center’s limited
authority. .

 

 

 

individual republics. Yet Russia would be an even
more powerful primus inter pares than it is today
because of Yel’tsin’s prestige and because of the
resources it would control. Its growing sense of
national identity and the possible emergence of a
“Russia first” attitude could also undermine the new
union. Ukrainian nationalism could also lead this
republic to go its own way with similar effect.

A Slavic—Central Asian state would have most of the
military potential that the USSR has today, although
it probably would choose to field smaller and more
Slavic armed forces. It would continue to be a nuclear
superpower, but its conventional forces would be

much reduced and their posture largely defensive. The
market reforms that such a state would undertake,
however, would over time (but not in the five-year
time frame of this Estimate) give it a more reliable
economic base for developing military technologies
and modernizing the military, should its leadership
and people decide on such a course.

BEST G0PY
AVARLABLE

The biggest problem for the six republics that would

form independent states would be economic because

of their meager industrial and resource bases and

their small populations. Most would move quickly

toward market economies, but how well their econo-

mies functioned would also depend heavily on the

degree to which they cooperated with the Slavic~Cen-

tral Asian state, each other, and their other neighbors.

The Baltic states would be parliamentary democra-

cies; the other three—while democratic in form—

probably would tend more toward authoritarian

states.

The internal growing pains that the Slavic—Central
Asian state and the others experience would compli-
cate relations among them, Demarcating the new
borders alone would be enough to generate tensions.
The most serious problems—which would entail some
violence—would most likely be between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, and between the new union, on the one
hand, and Georgia and Moldova, on the other.

Such problems among and inside the new regimes
that emerged in “system change” could over the
longer run become serious enough to cause such a
regime to fail. Reestablishment of the old Communist
order would not occur, but the military and security
services might be able to resume control (as in the
“regression” scenario) or chaos and wide-scale
violence could ensue (as in the “fragmentation”
scenario) due to the failure of political and economic
reform.

Implications for the West

Despite the uncertainties such tensions among the
former components of the USSR would create for the
West, this would be far and away the most favorable
outcome for Western countries. The Slavic—Central
Asian core state would be smaller, less militarily
powerful, much more pluralistic, and almost certainly
more desirous of close relations with the West than
was the USSR. Especially in the period following its
creation, it would seek extensive Western involvement
in developing its political and, particularly, economic
Page-15
structures. This probably would give the West unprec-
edented opportunities to shape development of the

new state, but it would also bring with it requests for
far more substantial economic aid than Western
countries would be willing to provide. The West would
face very hard choices in apportioning limited eco-
nomic assistance among the Slavic-Central Asian
State, the other newly independent states, and the
democracies of Eastern Europe.

The Slavic-Central Asian state, while heavily focused
during the time frame of this Estimate on creating a
new system at home, would still be an important

player on the world scene. It would seek admission to
European economic and security structures, posing
dilemmas for Western governments. East European
states already seek membership in these institutions,
and some would worry that the new Soviet Union’s
acceptance into these clubs would dilute the meaning-
fulness of their membership. On the other hand, East
European fears of a resurgent, militaristic USSR or of
massive instability there would be substantially re-
duced in such a scenario.

The Slavic-Central Asian core state probably would
seek a major expansion of arms control agreements
with the West. It would have an economic interest in
cutting its military, and—perceiving the United
States as a vital source of assistance—probably would
seek significant reductions in strategic arms. This
state would not forgo nuclear weapons, since they
would continue to be important to its security and
superpower status, but it probably would be willing to
make reciprocal, and perhaps even radical, cuts in
numbers of weapons.

The Allies probably would see less justification for
maintaining NATO and a US troop presence on the
Continent if the Soviet Union disintegrated as depict-
ed in this scenario. The Europeans would almost
certainly invite the new states to join CSCE. The
Allies, however, would resist any efforts by these new
states to join NATO.

Regression

This scenario assumes traditionalist forces seize con-
trol in order to break the back of the democratic
reform movement and halt the republics’ move toward
sovereignty and independence. Although Gorbachev
could lead such a move, it is more likely he would be
compelled to go along or be forced from office. The
security services and the military, who spearhead this
course, use force on a large scale to reassert central
control. Widespread arrests of leading opponents,
including Yel’tsin, occur. The new leaders attempt to
Page-16
reinstitute centralized control over the economy. Al-
though this averts collapse of the command economy
for awhile, it does little to halt the economy’s continu-
ing sharp decline.

Implications for the USSR

This scenario would involve a series of harsh measures
that succeed in reestablishing a measure of central
control. The use of force could produce political
“stability” for a few years, given the organizational
weakness of the democratic forces and the lack of
unity among the republics bent on secession, This
course might also appeal to a significant Portion of the
Slavic-Central Asian publics tired of political debate
and seeking political order and economic stability.
Such popular support would prove short-lived, how-
ever, if the new government failed to deliver. Eventu-
ally, renewed political opposition and civil disorder
would probably develop.

The new leaders would find it difficult to gain popular
legitimacy for their rule. The draconian step of
reintroducing the command-administrative economic
system, largely discarded under Gorbachev, would not
be able to rebuild the center-republic economic ties
disrupted by the independence movement. As workers
saw their economic status continuing to deteriorate,
they would become less reluctant to engage in passive
and active resistance to the center’s Power,

The new government would also lack an ideological
basis to justify its actions, since Marxism-Leninism
has been totally discredited, along with the Commu-
nist Party. An appeal to Russian nationalism by the
conservative leadership would be possible—and could
take the form of a national salvation committee—but
such a step would further antagonize the restive
tepublics. It could provide the basis for an authoritar-
ian‘regime in Russia, however, that follows a “Russia
first” policy at the expense of the rest of the union.

The biggest problem for the leadership would be
maintaining unionwide control. The use of force to
hold the union together would almost certainly lead to
open civil conflict within several republics, particu-
larly those having their own paramilitary forces, such
as Georgia and Armenia. Controlling such unrest

 

Indicators of “Regression”

 
    

* Gorbachev, or-successors, use whatever force
necessary to maintain the:union:. - i

* Traditionalists gain dominance; begin setting
Political and economic. agenda: 2.

* Regime censors media; Suppresses individual
Sreedoms; harasses/arrests opposition groups.

+ Regime reasserts central control over the.

economy.

 

 

 

would severely tax security and military forces; pro-
longed conflict would threaten the internal cohesion
and discipline of the troops, particularly if they had to
be used against Slavic groups.

This scenario could unravel quickly if the center were
unable to quash the democratic resistance, if Yel’tsin

or another popular leader were able to escape the
center's dragnet and rally popular resistance, or if the
military proved unreliable. Even so, reform and re-
public leaders might not survive even a short-lived
repression, leaving a political vacuum at the center

and in many republics. Such widespread unrest would _._
also exacerbate the ethnic, political, and generational
splits within the armed forces and security services.

If repression failed, the result probably would be
anarchy and a chaotic disintegration of the union;
that is, the “fragmentation” scenario. In that event,
Most republics would break away from the center.
This breakup of the union would most likely be
accompanied by civil wars.

Implications for the West

This scenario, while less volatile than “fragmenta-
tion,” would create conditions least responsive to
Western influence. The immediate outcome would be
a more combative posture toward the West, which the
new leadership would see as opposed to its seizure of
power and its harsh internal measures, Western criti-
cism would fuel a “hunker down” attitude among the
Page-17
leadership, further straining relations. The tegime’s
probable political, economic, and military policies
would generate renewed concern in the West over the
USSR’s intentions and would frighten the Soviet
Union’s neighbors, particularly in Eastern Europe.
Such a regime, however, probably would seek to avoid
confrontation with the West because of the fragility of
the situation within the USSR.

The hardline leadership would place arms contro]
negotiations on the back burner, and its willingness to
adhere to existing arms control agreements—particu-
larly CFE—would be increasingly doubtful as. politi-
cal tensions with the West rose. There probably would
be a greatly reduced willingness to cooperate with the
West in reducing regional tensions, although for
economic reasons the new leadership would be reluc-
tant to be drawn into foreign adventures. Neverthe-
less, the regime would take an aggressive approach to
arms sales to the Third World, complicating Western
efforts at promoting regional security.

Such a regime would adopt a more assertive attitude
toward the countries of Eastern Europe and might
threaten to hold up any remaining troop withdrawals
unless Germany and Poland acceded to Soviet secu-
rity and economic demands. Given its weakened
condition and Preoccupation with maintaining in-
ternal control, however, a traditionalist regime would
almost certainly remove these forces in the end rather
than precipitate an East-West crisis.

Although more confrontational, the regime would be
unable, due to the changed social environment and
the weakened economy, to conduct an arms buildup

similar to the Brezhnev era, even though it might
place greater priority on heavy and defense industry,
It would assert its rights as a military power, but its
main focus would be on the USSR’s internal prob-
iems.

Fragmentation

This scenario assumes there is no effective central
government. Power resides in the republics and, in
some cases, even in localities. Republics, along with
many of the ethnically based regions, secede en masse
from the union. Ethnic and social tensions explode in
many areas; the security services and military are
unable to maintain order. The result is widespread
anarchy and local civil wars made worse by the
proliferation of paramilitary forces and the defection
of units from the military. Attempts to establish ties
among republics prove difficult due to differences in
political and economic agendas and the ineffective
control of most governments. Many regional and local
governments quickly rise and fall. The collapse of the
national command economy and its supporting infra-
structure leads to local systems of exchange, largely
based on barter.

Implications for the USSR

This scenario not only would spell the end of the
USSR as a unitary state, it would also make it
unlikely that the union could reconstitute itself as a
federation, or even a confederation, during the time
frame of this Estimate. The country’s fragmentation
into a number of individual political units, many
overtly or potentially hostile toward one another,
would increase the likelihood of prolonged civil wars,
which would further sap the strength of already
besieged local economies. The economic chaos would
lead to severe food shortages or even famine in parts
of the country.

The power vacuum in Moscow would heighten pros-
pects for a military seizure of power and a succession
of coups, as senior military commanders tried to hold
Page-18
Figure 4
The Fragmentation of the Soviet Union
Into a Multitude of States

   
 

Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
(R.S.F.S.R)

Soviet Union

 

   

 
 

}

Potential States

Russian Federation
Baltic Confederation
Belorussia

Ukraine

CI
C23 Moldova
a)
Co
Co

 
 

 

Georgia
Armenia
Azerbaijan

500 1000 Kilometers (=) Centrat Asian Confederation

°
Pat
°

1600 Mites

 

together the rapidly collapsing union. Even if ele-
ments in the military and security services were
inclined to intervene in an effort to rescue the union,
they would not be able to ensure the loyalty of many
of the individual units. Widespread defections and
mutinies would make large-scale use of force to
stabilize the situation impossible. There would be a
very real danger that military and security force units
would defect to the leadership of the republics, provid-
ing a ready pool of men and arms with which to

722382 (545547) 6-91

prosecute conflict against other republics or dis-
affected elements within the republics. Some of these
forces could also pose a threat to the leadership of the
now independent republics.

“Fragmentation” is not likely to last indefinitely. As
with “system change,” there would be no possibility of
putting the old system back together again, but new
Page-19
BEST CEPY

x

ANE ELE

 

Indi

 
   

tors of “Fragmentation”

    
  
    
 
 

  
 
   
   
   

2 Cooperation between center and most repu
ics ceases; republics ignore center's direc-

tives, including laws on military conscript

 

Central and republic governments increas-
ingly unable to control:violent protests over
deteriorating economic and political condi-:.
tions; but opposition unable to unite, coordi.
nate actions. . 2 . :

   

 

Interrepublic ties dwindle sharply; republics
make political, economic, and ter itorial
demands on one another. “4

 

 

Command economy collapses; attempts by
republics and localities to establish alterna’

tive economic systems fail; economic condi-
‘tions deteriorate sharply.

 

.* Military discipline begins to unravel.

° Ethnic and labor disturbances Spread rapidly,

 

 

 

attempts at forging cooperation among some of the
peoples of the former Soviet Union would be made.
Russia would be the key. The establishment of strong
and effective leadership in the Russian Republic could
stabilize the political and economic situation ina
relatively short period (perhaps several years) depend-
ing on the policies it adopted and its abilities to
establish economic ties to other tepublics and coun-
tries. Such a development would also depend on the
Russian leadership’s ability to exercise control over its
own disaffected ethnic groups, as well as its ability to
gain command of what remains of the armed forces,
An economically and politically viable Russia would
exercise a strong influence on neighboring peoples still
wrestling with the effects of the collapse of the USSR.

Implications for the West

This scenario is potentially the most dangerous for the
West because of the chaos and unpredictability of
events. Although the USSR would disappear as a
cohesive military power, the Prospects of nuclear and
other weapons of mass destruction falling into the -
hands of some republics, mutinous troops, or radical
groups would pose a new set of risks. There would be
a heightened risk of threatened or accidental use of
such weapons inside—and much less likely, outside—
the Soviet Union. There would also be a greater
chance for nuclear materials and expertise finding
their way to foreign states seeking to develop nuclear
weapons.
Page-20
Widespread civil conflict or war within and between
republics would also pose major dangers for the West.
Conflict within the former territory of the USSR
would have the potential for spilling across borders,
Particularly in central and southern Europe and
Southwest Asia. Western countries would have to
weigh the merits of recognizing new governments in
breakaway republics or in Russia itself. One or anoth-
er of the contending factions would be likely to appeal
to the West for economic and military assistance, if
Not outright security guarantees.

Beyond the dangers posed to the West by the interne-
cine strife would be the very real challenge of dealing
with the extreme economic hardship, including fam-
ine, likely to affect the bulk of the former USSR.
Massive infusions of assistance and capital would
almost certainly be required to alleviate suffering, but
the lack of a central government, or perhaps even
tepublic governments, capable of directing the inflow
of economic aid—as well as ongoing violence—would
undermine the effectiveness of any effort. The West
would also be confronted with the problem of massive
numbers of refugees fleeing the disorder, which could

CAeverse bank

destabilize countries bordering the USSR. Despite
these problems, Western assistance probably would be
critical to the ability of the various republics and
regions to move beyond the difficulties associated
with this scenario to more stable political and €co-,
nomic systems. «

This scenario would also make any coherent Soviet
foreign policy extremely unlikely. There would be no
central authority in Moscow to conclude arms control
negotiations, implement accords already reached, or
to ensure the completion of troop withdrawals from
Central Europe. Moreover, in a situation of anarchy
and civil wars in the USSR, Soviet forces remaining
in the region would not be a military threat but would
present serious problems for their hosts should they
refuse repatriation; widespread disorder among these
troops would be likely.
Page-21
