
Page-1
Coneurréd in by the
Page-2

Page-3
NOE... eee ee eee .

THE PROBLEM

EXPLANATORY NOTE. - +--+ ++ +

THE ESTIMATE . 2-2 ee ee es

I.

Ir.

In.

CONTENTS

IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WESTERN ALLIANCE AND US
RELATIONS WITH WESTERN EUROPE

General

Impact of Cutbacks on European Military Progrens
Politicel Impact of Cutbacks ...---
Effectiveness of Various US Explanations

COMMUNIST REACTIONS

POSSIELE BROADER IMPLICATIONS

 
 

Page
eee 1
ee L
oe 3
rs)
oe - 3
eee 3
eee 8
eee T
--- 12
wee 13
oe. YD

GROUP 1. =

declassification

belied fr €4 from automatic cl
* downgrading and
Page-4
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

27 October 1966

SUBJECT: SNIE 20-1-66: FOREIGN REACTIONS TO CERTAIN US COURSES OF
ACTION REGARDING US FORCES IN EUROPE

NOTE

This SNIE was done at the request of Mr. John J. McCloy, the President's
Special Representative for the current negotiations with the United Kingdon
and the Federal Republic concerning Allied strategy, force levels, and
financial problems. The terms of reference were provided by him and his
staff. In view of the special character of the paper, the summary con-

clusions usually provided in NWIEs were omitted.

THE PROBLEM

To estimate foreign reactions to various US courses of action affecting

American forces stationed in Europe. The elternative courses are:

   

 
 
  

 

___ root ~

_.» Excluded from automatic’.
$-E-C-R-E-1/SENSITIVE downgrading and i
.. RESTRICTED DISSEM declassification- }

anna
Page-5
Case 1:

Case 2:

Case 3:

 

— o ns
$-B-C-RB-1/SENSITIVE ~\
‘ CISD DISSEM \

 

—~

To maintain US ground end air forces in West Germany at
L

their present reveron the basis of German agreement to

continue to bear at least a substantial portion of for-

eign exchange costs.

To cut 30,000 men from US ground forces by a thinning-out
process, which would eliminate some subordinate units but
retain the present number of combat divisions; in addition,
to establish dual besing arrangements for 10 percent of US
aircraft and associated personnel now assigned to Germany,
so that they would in the future be based part of the time
in the continental US. These measures would reduce US

dollar expenditures abroad by ebout $74,500,000 annually.

fo cut 50,000 to 60,000 men from US ground forces, including
withdrawal of? one combat division; in addition, to arrange
for dual basing of 20 percent of US air strength. These

measures would reduce US dollar expenditures abroad by

about $151,000,000 annually.

 

Present US ground forces in West Germany total about 185,000 men
(authorized strength 223,270 men) including five combat divisions
and three brigades and supporting elements; present US Air: Force
strength consists of about 300 aircraft and 25,000_men including
14 squadrons plus supporting elements. The number of US navel
personnel based in West Germany is insignificant.
Page-6
\

To cut 150,000 men from US ground forces, including with-
drawal of two to three combat divisions; in addition, to
arrange for dual besing of 40 percent of US air strength.

These measures would reduce US dollar expenditures abroad

py about, $338,000,000 annually.

EXPLANATORY NOTE: Each of the postulated US reductions of ground

force strength given above would not necessarily be ec-
companied by the specific change in eir strength with

which it is listed. For example, the cut (Case 2, above)
of 30,000 men from the US ground forces could be accompanied
vy dual basing of either 10 percent, 20 percent, or 40 per-
cent of US aircraft and associeted personnel. Thus the
specific cases we have chosen are intended to be illustra-
tive of orders of magnitude and are rot the only possitl«

combinations.

Tae ESTIMATE

TMPLICATIONS FOR THE WESTERN ALLIANCE AND US RELATIONS WITH

1.

Generel

WESTERN EUROPE

For some time, many West Europeen voices, not confined to France,

have called for their countries to exercise a greater influence over the

area's policies, with a concomitant reduction of US predominance. Differ-

ences in power and interest were bound to give rise to this attitude in
Page-7
time, but they have received strong stimlus from the spreading conviction
that, despite the USSR's great military power, the likelihood of a Soviet
attack against Western Europe has greatly diminished. In 1966 develop-
ments in certain countries reflected a further assertion of an independent
European interest: the formal French withdrawal from NATO, domestic
attacks upon the pro-US policy of the West Cerman Government, and a genu-
ine uneasiness and concern over the growing US involvement in Vietnam.
The issue of US troop levels in West Germany and the related financial

problems will obviously affect the evolving political climte of Western

Europe.

2. Case 1: The retention of US forces at present strength, under
some financial arrengement accezted both by the US and other NATO nations
concerned, would not eliminate the present melaise in the alliance. A
troubled phase in German-American reletions is in prospect even if the US
decides to maintain present force levels in West Germany. Thus, it does
not appear that a wholly emicable settlement of the offset problem is
within reach, given the history of the issue and the likely German atti-
tude. On the other hand, if the tripartite negotiations did result in a
US decision to continue present force levels, relief would be felt by
those who had feared an early and redical change in US policy. Especially

in Germany, there would probably be some temporary improvement in the cli-

mate of reletions.
Page-8
3. Cases 2, 3, and 4: Any of the three force cuts would raise some

 

doubts about the firmess of the US commitment to Europe's security, espe-
cially in the light of earlier pledges that force levels would be maintained.
In Cases 2 and 3, the governments would realize that the US still had sub-
stantial military forces in place, certainly enough to commit it fully in
case of Soviet attack. While the withdrawal of a divisional unit under

Case 3 would attract considerable notice, we doubt that in the end reactions
would be significantly different from those under Case 2. Under el the
alternatives, the concern would be far less with the immediate security
implications than with what the move might signify about US intentions

over the long term. Nevertheless, Case k would give rise to instant and
serious alarm in many quarters. Most governments would see a confirmation
of their fears that US policy has shifted to give priority to Asia over
Europe. There would be a marked loss of confidence in US leadership within

the alliance, and the Germans would feel in addition a real concern for

their long-term security.
Impact of Cutbecks on European Military Programs

A On strictly military grounds, if such considerations could be
separated from the political implications, there would be little strong
opposition in NATO to either of the two smaller force reductions. Most

NATO governments do not believe that the military security of Western Europe
Page-9
- a ~
S-E-C-R-B-T/SHISITIVE \\
CTED DISSEM

vc ~~

 

t

depends on large conventional forces physically located there, as their om
reluctance to meet NATO commitments shows. The present West German Govern-
ment would argue that its military security was endangered by even the
smallest cut, but would do so mainly for political reasons. It would fear
that a process oi military disengagement in Central Europe was getting
underway and that this meant tacit acceptance of an indefinitely divided
Germany. West Germany has, in fact, tended to follow after the rest of
European opinion in downgrading the likelihood of Soviet attack. In view
of possible changes of political leedership in Bonn, however, the views
that the German Government would uphold must be considered somewhat

uncertain.

5. In the absence of a visibly revived threat from the East, we do
not believe that either the smaller NATO countries or Greet Britain would
expand their own cefense establishrents to fill the military gap caused by
the Case 2 or 3 cuts. They would not see eny “gap." Great Britain's eco-
nomic problems will almost certainly lead it to reduce its defense estab-
lishment in coming years in any case. Most of the smaller HATO countries
would probaoly reduce their defense efforts somewhat, and even West Germany
would almost certainly not expand its forces. Bonn has only reluctantly
supported the concept of flexible response which requires large ground

forces, and would prefer a deterrent strategy based on a lower nuclear

threshold.

6. If the US made the Case cut, other NATO countries would probably

consider that they were politically and economically unable to make up the

75-n-c-R-2-2/ spas)
\. RESTRECTED DISSEM

ee

or —
Page-10
entire difference. West Germany and France might attempt to move toward a
common, end perhaps eventually an enlarged, defense effort with other
European nations who wished to participate, but this would depend on the

outcome of highly uncertain political developments in the countries con-

cerned.
Political Impact of Cutbacks

7. Though NATO governments are generally agreed thet the likelihood
of a Soviet attack has diminished, all members except France want NATO to
continue to serve as a political instrument of Western cooperation. Most
would also like to preserve it as a fremevork in which to contain the
Germans, concerning whose future conduct there is still apprehension.
Almost all member states would in fact probably try harder than ever to

keep the US politically involved in Europe.

8. The largest cut (Case 4), coming at a time of visible diserray
in the alliance, would be interpreted in some quarters as a deliberate US
move toward substantial disengagement from European affairs. It would
provoke a wider debate than has yet developed about the future of the
alliance, and bring into question the entire structure of political and
military concepts upon which it hes been based. Some immetus would be
given to the contention that Europe's best course would be to move toward

-T-
—e

ae

$-8-C-R-E-1/SENSTTIVE
RESTRICTED DISSEM

 

<
Page-11
a neutral position between the US and the USSR. This in turn could alter
the foreign policy positions and internal political balances in individual
countries, and in time change the political and military power structure
of Europe. But this would be a long process, and its outcome would depend
greatly upon subsequent US policies, upon Soviet reactions and attitudes,

and upon domestic political developments which are not now foreseeable.

9. France. General de Gaulle would be strengthened in his effarts
to undermine the US position in Europe, marginally in Cases 2 or 3, and in
a major way if the US carried out the largest reduction. Any US withdrawal
would bring greater receptivity for de Gaulle's statements that the US
commitment was unreliable, and he would encourage suspicions that small
cuts -- if such are decided upon -- were only 2 first step toward larger
ones. Such tactics would probably not only gein some supoort in other
West European countries for French policies, put would also strengthen
de Gaulle domestically. None of the cuts, however, would of itself bring

success to French efforts to destroy NATO as a political instrument of

US-European cooperation.

10. The main thrust of de Gaulle's diplomacy in the aftermath of a
US force reduction would probably be renewed efforts to displace paramount

US influence in Bonn with his om. Pressure would be brought to get the
Page-12
Germans to adopt French views on European questions. More comprehensive
offers of Franco-Germen collaboration might be made, perhaps including
new proposals in the military field. Such a diplomatic campeign would
probably neet with some success; how much would depend on developments

in internal German politics. De Gaulle would expect to see a new fluidity
developing in Europe's power combinations; in these circumstances, he
would probably move cautiously in developing his relations with the USSR,

and he would be particulerly alert to any sign of movement in Soviet-

German relations.

11. West Germany. The question of US force levels in Europe and the
associated financial burdens have their greatest impact on Germany, where
they have already helped to sharpen policy conflicts end personal rivalries.
The administration of Chancellor Erhard and his Foreign and Defense Ministers,
Schroeder end von Hessel, which has in the past strongly supported close
ties with the US, has for various reasons come under heavy attack. A prin-
cipal feature of the current political infighting is e tendency on the part
of Erhard's opponents, both within and outside his party, to accuse him of

having placed too much trust in US willingness to uphold German interests.

12. The opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) has recently been

engaged in efforts to show greater initiative on East European and all-

German policy issues in ways and at a pace which the Erhard edministration

-9-

 

(sone)

BS DISSEM A
Page-13
does not favor. Although these efforts are not contrary to US policy (the
SPD is fond of relating its activities to the concepts of President Kennedy
and President Johnson), they reflect in fact a growing inclination to pursue

German interests more independently of US guidance.

13. Much of the German public still retains basic confidence in US
policy, and probably neither of the two smaller troop cuts would seriously
erode this confidence. There would, of course, be less of a problem if the
German political leadership defended the US action. In the present polit-
ical infighting, however, most Germen political leaders and opinion makers

will either be unvilling or uneble to do this.

14. Either of the smaller force reductions would strengthen the
arguments of German Gaullists in the cou/csu and would further weaken the
Erhard government. Either would also add to existing pressures, both from
Gaullists advocating priority for Frenco-German cooperation and from the
advocates of flexibility toward the East, for a reexamination of West German
attitudes toward the US, France, and NATO integration. Nevertheless,
despite considerable political cammotion, we believe that the basic course
of present West German policy would survive this event. There would be
some deterioration in the climate of German-American relations, however,

especially since other factors are independently working in this direction.
Page-14
a a
R-BLe WSITIVE
TaD DISSHM

 

15. It seems clear that a major reduction in US forces would convince
many Germans that US support for German interests and German standing in the
alliance were on the wane, and that this in turn could be a deeply unsettling
factor in German politics. Tne Case 4 cuts would almost certainly meen
either the end of. the Erhard government or such a shift in its composition
that it would in effect be a new government. In either case, broader
representation would almost certainly be afforded to those Germans who
advocate greater independence from American policy guidance and some degree

of increased cooperation with the French.

16. Large force reductions, coming at a time of confusion and crisis
in internal German politics and of growing uncertainty about whether the
allies support German interests, would of course stimulate German tend-
encies to consider alternatives to Bonn's present foreign policies. The
Germans have been moving toward a recognition that their Western partners
are either unwilling or unable to do anything about Germany's national
problem. But they realize, too, that initiatives of their own toward the
USSR have no foreseeable prospect of success, except at 2 price and with
risks they are unwilling to contemplate. A political leadership might
finally appear in Bonn which would attempt a policy of rapprochement with
Fast Germany. If this did not bring movement toward unification, the West
Germans would have no choice out to reconcile themselves to their situation

for en indefinite period. We cannot foresee whet this might do to the
Page-15
stability of German politics, or to the value of West Germany as an

ally.

lT. Great Britain. Basically, Britain sees no alternative at present
to the political status quo in central Europe, and believes it can be
maintained with some reduction of present forces as long as the basic US
guarentee of European security remains firm and believable. The British
Government would accept with equanimity either of the smaller force cuts
and would continue with its om plans to remove part of its forces from
West Germany. Britain's reaction to the Case 4 cuts would probably be
for the most part negative. The predominant feeling would probably be a
concern for the long-term stability of the Continent and for the viability

of present arrangements for the containment of Germany.
Effectiveness of Various US Explanetions

18. Throughout Europe, the impact of US force reductions could perhaps
be marginally softened or considerably exacerbated by our public handling of
the issue. We doubt that emphasis on US talence-of-payments problems and US
inability to work out full offset arrangements would receive mich sympathy;
the sums to be saved probably would not seen large enough to provide justi-
fication for the cuts. It would prebably further complicate US policy toward
NATO for the US to join publicly and officially the common West European

views that the Soviet threst to Durope had diminished. It would not be

\

wat
$-E-C-R-5-1/SENSITIVE
BERIETCTED DISSEA
Page-16
helpful to refer to a troop cut in the context of promoting a US policy of
detente. This explanation would have a perticulerly adverse effect in West
Germany, where the government argues that force reductions should be made

only in return for specific Soviet concessions on the German question.

19. Another line of argument would be to emphasize that significant
US forces remained in Europe and that advances in weaponry end logistics
now make it possible for the US to meet its commitment to the defense of
Europe with fewer forces on hand on the Continent. This line of ergument
would not be particularly cogent in Germany, but it would reassure some

Europeans that the cuts did not represent 2 fundamental shift in US policy.

20. Regardless of how the cuts were explained, ‘however, most European
governments and the bulk of sophisticated opinion would conclude that the
real reasons were US balance-of-paynents problems and the manpower needs

of the Vietnam war. There would be widesprezd concern that US preoccupation
with Vietnam would in time lead to still further withdrawals, and many would
feel that a cutback tied to Vietnam was @ sign that the US might be over-

extended in its commitments.

II. COMMUNIST REACTIONS

21. As nas been implied above, there would be a large measure of inter-

action vesween attitudes in Western and Eastern Europe in the wake of a chang?
Page-17
in the US posture. Most West European opinion now proceeds from the as-
sumption that the policy of the USSR and its allies has changed and is
directed toward detente. The implication of this attitude is that there
is no longer mich reason to fear @ renewal of aggressive pressures fron
the East. If Soviet behavior in the wake of force cuts should disappoint
these expectations, obviously the reactions attributed to Western Europe
in the foregoing discussion would be quite different. But the attitudes
and behavior of the USSR and its allies would in turn depend to a great

extent on the movement of opinion end policy in Western Europe.

22. A principal Soviet objective for some years past has been to
obtain from the West an acceptance of the status quo in central Europe,
including the division of Germany. During the prolonged crisis over
Berlin (1958-1962), the Soviets pursued their objective by threat and
pressure. Subsequently, the Soviets used the tactics of “detente” with
the US. Hore recently, their propaganda and diplomacy have stressed the
need for a reduction of tensions in central Europe and for all-European
security arrangements which would be built on the existence of two German
states. They presumably calculate that acceptance of this thesis by the
West, including the US, would isolate the Federal Republic, introduce
strains into its relations with the ellies, and ultimately set in train
a shift of political forces within the Federal Republic more favorable to

Soviet long-term purposes. The reduction of US military strength in Europe
Page-18
ner

TIVE *

TED DISSEM

    

Or
4 S-E-C -R-E.

 

would be seen as catecvie to these aims and tactics, and probably also as

a sign that NATO's further disintegration was in prospect.

23. We believe that, initially at least, the Soviets would consider
it to their edvantage to continue 2 conciliatory line toward Western Europe,
except of course toward Bonn. They would probably say thet the US had been
"compelled -- by the pressures of Europeen opinion and by the strains of
the Vietnam wer -- to retreat from its "domination" of the West European
states. The Soviets would not wish to do anything to arrest this process,
and they therefore would probably not revert to tactics of pressure and
threat in Germany. They would recognize, moreover, that the drawiowm of
US forces did not mean an abandonment of US commitments in Europe and that
& renewed challenge there would still provoke @ major crisis, with a con-

sequent reversal of European attitudes and a renewed buildup of the American

ilitary presence.

oh, The initial Soviet reaction, therefore, would probably be to
adopt a diplomatic and propaganda stence which would encourege West Euro-
pean opinion to believe that no new risks threatened because of the US
moves. It would be emphasized that 2 Europe in which US influence was
diminished and the independence of European states was repsserted could
easily arrive at broad end lasting security arrengements. The outline of

such an all-Europeen settlement is contained in the Bucherest Decleration

-15-

 
   
 

(($-E-C-R-Ez
Page-19
adopted by the Warsaw Pact states in July 1966, and this would no doubt be

the centerpiece of the Soviet diplomatic effort. ts main features include
acceptance of existing frontiers, thet is, Germany's frontiers, recognition
of two German states, and their permanent exclusion from any sort of access

to nuclear weapons. The declaration also advocates an all-Furopean security
conference to adopt these measures and other undertakings which would insure
peace and stability in Europe for the indefinite future. Probably some such
political line would be the main immediate response from the East to the new

situation created by a drawiown of US forces.

25. The Soviets would probably also believe that NATO itself was
becoming more vulnerable to diplomatic and propaganda pressure by them.
They would presumably intensify efforts they have made in the past to get
Norway and Denmark to loosen their ties to NATO or even to exchange this
link for entry into a Scendinavien security zone. A special security
arrangement for southeastern Europe might be devised to attract Greece
and Turkey avay from NATO. And the Soviets would do what they could to
give more substance to their rapprochement with Frence. They would expect
that any new discords they might be able to foster in the Western Alliance

would help to accelerate the departure of US power, and bring them nearer

to their ultimate goal of a fragmented Europe in which their own power was

clearly unchallenged.
Page-20
26. The Soviets would of course consider whether, to promote an
advantageous climate of detente, they should reciprocate US force with-
drawals with withdrawals of their own. We believe that they would not
wish to negotiate an agreement to do this, mainly for two reasons. It
is their current line to emphasize dealings among Europeans on European
questions and to minimize dealings with the US. Perhaps more important
at present is their policy to avoid any acts which would suggest that they

were facilitating US military reinforcement in Southeast Asie.

27. We do, however, believe the chances are good that the Soviets
would, after they had taken some time to appraise the political-military
effects of the US withdrawals, carry out some withdrawals of their own 2!
They have advanced proposals for outual withdrawals in the past, and they
would probably like, for 2 variety of reasons, to reduce their forces in
East Germany. How deep the cuts might co seems to us beyond prediction. at
present. The extent cf such reductions would be determined mainly by the

USSR's appraisal of the conditicn of HATO and of the political and policy

tendencies developing in Western Hurope, in particular in West Germany, and

 

2/ Maj. Gen. Chester L. schnson, Acting Assistant Chief of Staff for Intel-

~ ligence, Department of the Army, believes that, while 2 possibility of
Soviet withdravals exists, available evidence is insufficient to support
a judgment thet "the chances are good that the Soviets would . . . carry
out sone withdrewals of their om."

  

-ir-

 

$-E-C-R-E-1/SEHSt

h

{
Page-21
whether these could be more advantageously influenced by intimidation

or by inducement.

28. In general, the reactions of the USSR's Warsaw Pact allies to the
moves discussed in this estimate would be much the same as those of the
USSR. The idea of a developing detente on terms which the East has advocated
would be congenial to them. They would welcome the opportunity to develop
their trade with Western Europe, and would hope that military burdens could
be eased. Some of them might want to move faster in developing relations
with West Germany than East Germmeny, Poland, and the USSR would went. The
USSR might think it had reason to be concerned about the degree of inde-
pendence that would develop in time from the assertion of these interests.
But unless there were fundamental chenges in the political and military
structure of Europe, the basic alignnent of these courtries with the USSR

would not be affected.

29. The Soviets would be less interested in the reasons given for the
US moves than in what the changes meant for power relations in central
Europe and for the possibility of developing end exploiting @ political
estrangement between the US and its allies. If the Soviets should judge
these factors to ve favoreble, they might eventually depart from the
cautious tactics which we believe would mark their early reactions and

return once again to policies of pressure. In the general struggle with

318 -

. wee
3-5-¢,eittt/SENSTIIVE )
RESTRICTED DISSE
Page-22
American power, in which they see themselves as inevitably involved, their

aim remains to induce as many European states as possible to take a neutral
position. They have shown in the past that they consider both pressure

and persuasion as suitable tactics to this end, and would presumably employ

both again as their judgment of circumstances might dictate.

30. The Asian Commnists. Hanoi and Peking would believe, on the one
hand, that US resources were being strained end that the US had suffered a :
further setback in its efforts to gain European support for its Asian
policy. On the other hand, they would expect that US power was about to
be concentreted on a still greater scale in the Asian theater.. However
they struck the balance, we doubt that their will to persist in pursuit

of their own declared objectives in Southeast Asia would be affected.

TIT. POSSIBLE BROADER IMPLICATIONS

31. Interpretations -- and no doubt overinterpretations -- of the
meaning of 2 US move to change its posture in the vital European theater
would be made by political leaders all over the world. Many would probably
believe that this development marked 2 welcome further stage in the dis-
mantling of the cold war, at yeast in Europe. Some might think it provided

proof that American power and resources were overextended and reverberations

- 19--

(Cs -R-E-I,

YL
Page-23
from American domestic debate might help to sustain this view. On the whole,
we do not believe there would be eny substantial political costs in other

areas in consequence of US withdravels from Europe.

32. Our judgment that no serious problems for US policy in other
areas are likely to result from troop reductions in Europe applies only
to the relatively near term. The elignment of forces which has obtained
in Europe for two decades has been the central feature of the world's
power structure. If, in consequence of US moves and reactions to then,
it came to be believed that this alignment was changing, perceptions of
what power relations are and where interest and security Lie might alter,
both in Europe and elsewhere. We do not suggest that the particular
measures to reduce US forces in Europe which are discussed in this estimate
would predictably have such far-reaching effects. We do, believe, however,
that they might set in motion important changes in power relations and
political alignments, the full scope of which cannot be foreseen. Sone
unknown degree of risk inevitably attaches to deliberete moves to alter

long established political-military re. etionships.

33. It is also true that timing is a key factor effecting the con-
sequence of such moves. Initiatives which at one moment and in one set
of circumstances might have entirely tolerable or even advantageous effects,

might at another moment set in motion a train: of whclly adverse repercussions.
Page-24
At present, confidence in the wisdom of American policy has suffered in
many areas because of Vietnan. In NATO itself there is disarray and
uncertainty owing to the French challenge to the foundations of the
allience. Partly because of the developments, Soviet prestige and in-
fluence appear to have gained in comparison with US standing. Altogether,
there seems to us to be considerable risk that withdrawals from Europe,
especially if they ere large, would at this juncture convey an impression
of American wealmess in many quarters. This would probably not be @
lasting setback to American policy, but again, how others may react to

a change in their perception of the relations of power is largely unpre-

dictable.
