
Page-1
SNIE 100-8-58
7 October 1958

-CONFIBENTAL—
Ne 325

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 100-8-58

IMPLICATIONS OF AN INCREASE IN
US-SOVIET TRADE

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE 1 FULL

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 7 October 1958. Concurring were The Director of Intelli-
gence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Direc-
tor of Naval Intelligence; the Asststant Chief of Stag, Intelli-
gence, USAF; the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff;
the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations;
and the Director of the National Security Agency. .The Atomic
Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the
Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained,
the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.
Page-2
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

may be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

. Assistant Chief of Staff for. Intelligence, Department of the Army

. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

- Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

. Assistant to the Secretary ‘of Defense, Special Operations, for the Depart-
ment of Defense

. Director of the NSA, for the National Security Agency

- Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency :

2. This copy may be retained, or. destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-
cable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
tment with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with TAC-D-69/2, 22
June 1953.

4. The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, should be classified:
—COMEIDENTAL :

pPreorProanaaop

WARNING cee
‘This inatérial_contains info1 off” aftecting
the National ie wpt"the United States

within the megnin’™6f=the espionage Jaws,
Titie 16, ser cs. 793 and~i9g, the trans-

inissiquetF revelation of which in ally-manner
_Bronstvoied person is prohibited Dr

DISTRIBUTION:
White House
National Security Council
Page-3
This document has been
approved for release through

donde elDeiebiL wink the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of
the Central Intelligence Agency.

Date 4 iz] B
3

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Paragraph Page
DISCUSSION
I. INTRODUCTION Fo 5- 8 2- 3
II. POTENTIAL MAGNITUDE OF US-USSR TRADE... .. . 9-14 3-4
Il, EFFECTS WITHIN THE BLOC OF INCREASED US-USSR TRADE -
A. Economic Fe 158 4-5
B. Political. 2 2 2. 1 Dd, woe eee ee ee.) 19-20 5
IV. EFFECTS ON THE NON- COMMUNIST WORLD OF THE IN-
CREASED US-USSR TRADE. . . 21-23 5-6
we OILED Ll
Page-4
IMPLICATIONS OF AN INCREASE IN US-SOVIET TRADE

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the implications within the Bloc and the Free World of an increase

in US-USSR trade.

=\

CONCLUSIONS

1. The Soviets probably genuinely desire
an increase in US-USSR trade. The pos-
sibilities for expanding this trade are se-
verely restricted, however, by the limited
range of Soviet goods likely to be market-
able in the US, by US administrative and
legislative measures in the fields of com-
mercial policy and economic defense, and
by the uncertainty of private US business
reaction. We believe it reasonable to as-
sume that if the US were to modify cer-
tain administrative restrictions, especial-
ly export licensing, US export to the USSR
might expand over the next few years to
about $100-150 million annually. While
the USSR would probably not be able to
balance trade at this level by its own di-
rect export of goods to the US, it could
make up the residual amount by reex-
ports, transfers of free exchange, and by
selling more gold to the Free World.
(Paras. 5, 7, 9, 14)

2. An increase in imports from the US
of the volume and composition postulated
in this estimate would have little impact
on the Soviet economy. The consumers
goods industry could benefit the most if

the Soviet leaders so decided; in some
cases, however, the imported machinery
and equipment could be used to increase
the output of commodities for use in more
basic industry. Assuming US control on
the export of strategic goods, wé believe
the postulated increase in trade would
have little effect on Soviet military poten-
tial. Soviet trade with underdeveloped
countries or Communist China would not
be significantly affected. (Paras. 15-20)

3. The Soviet leaders probably believe
that increased trade with the US would
strengthen their line of peaceful coex-
istence, diminish US ability to maintain
Western trade controls and a general-
ly strong anti-Communist position, and
create frictions in the West as various
countries found themselves in competi-
tion with the US for Soviet trade. We do
not believe that these developments would
occur to a significant degree. Most non-
Communist countries would favorably
view an increase in US-USSR trade as a
sign that world tensions were relaxing.
This would not be true of South Korea
and Nationalist China, however, or among

Creede Nelnlalelen, 1
Page-5
CORRS 2

some elements in other countries. Japan,
as well as many underdeveloped countries,
would become less receptive than they
are today to US advice against expand-
ing economic relations with the Bloc.
(Paras. 8, 21)

‘4, In the final analysis the view taken by
most countries would depend largely upon
the impact which increased US-USSR
trade had upon the trade of those coun-
tries. It is possible that certain coun-

tries would be adversely affected by US
competition in the Soviet market or, more
probably, by an increase-in Soviet raw
material exports to the US. We believe
that at the postulated levels of trade such
effect would in general be small. Never-
theless, substantial increase in US im-
ports of certain specific commodities
from the USSR might seriously damage
the trade or the foreign exchange posi-
tion of particular Free World countries.
(Paras. 21-23)

DISCUSSION

|. INTRODUCTION

5. The possibility of a substantial increase in
US-USSR trade was raised by Khrushchev’s
letter to President Eisenhower, 2 June 1958.
Khrushchev proposed that the USSR would
buy non-strategic industrial equipment, espe-
cially for the production of synthetic materials
and consumer goods, and would sell to the US
in return basic commodities, including man-
ganese and chrome ore, asbestos, umber, furs,
and possibly some machinery and equipment
of modern design. To accelerate the expan-
sion of trade, he suggested that the US pro-
vide long term commercial credits. He also
Proposed the conclusion of licensing agree-
ments, exchange of technical information, and
an inter-governmental agreement to regulate
economic relations between the two countries.

6. Khrushchev’s proposal, although generally
businesslike in tone, was probably in the first
instance a propaganda gesture. Whether or
not it was accepted, it would further the
Soviet line of “peaceful coexistence” by ap-
pearing to respond positively to US proposals
that world trade be increased. It asserted
that US industry would be interested in
getting orders “now,” an obvious reference to
the US recession, the impact of which has
been overestimated by the Soviets. Moreover,
the fact that Khrushchev referred to trade in
the “billions” demonstrates the propaganda
aspects of the note. He is certainly aware

that the Soviet Union does not have exports
sufficiently attractive to the US market to
support trade at such a level; he must also be
aware that there is only the most remote
chance that the US, in present circumstances,
would extend large and long term credits to
the USSR.

7. Nevertheless, we believe that the Soviet
Union genuinely desires an increase in its
trade with the US—a trade which in 1957
comprised exports to the US of $16.8 million
and imports from the US of only $4.5 million.
The Soviet effort to strengthen its industrial
base and to increase the availability of con-
sumer goods would be facilitated by obtaining
technologically advanced machinery and
equipment from the US, e.g., for the petro-
chemical and plastic industries. The Soviets
would thus avoid some of the costs of develop-
ment, and, as Khrushchev pointed out to the
Central Committee in May 1958, could save
much time by importing plant from the US,
UK, and-West Germany. If in addition, they
could obtain long term US credits, they could
acquire the facilities to increase production
with a minimum initial drain on their own
resources.

8. The Soviet leaders almost certainly also be-
lieve that important political gains would flow
from a substantial increase in Soviet trade
with the US. In their view, it would be likely
to strengthen the Moscow line of peaceful

CeCubbelid eile
Page-6
oe Nabinahiatmlndede 3

coexistence and to weaken the effectiveness
of US efforts to maintain a strong anti-Com-
munist position. The Soviet leaders probably
believe that such a development would fur-
ther diminish the US ability to maintain
Western trade controls. They may also think
increased trade with the US would create
divisive frictions in the West as other Western
industrial countries observed the US increas-
ing its share of the Soviet market.

Il, POTENTIAL MAGNITUDE OF US-USSR
TRADE

9. Despite Soviet desire to expand US-USSR
trade, it is difficult to estimate the extent to
which this trade might realistically be ex-
pected to increase, and to judge the perma-
nence of such an increase if it were to occur.
The primary factors involved would be the
ability of the Soviet Union to make available
for export commodities which could be sold in
the US, the willingness of the US government
to relax legal and administrative discrimina-
tions against trade with the USSR, and the
willingness of private US industry to do busi-
ness with the Soviet Union.

10. Judging by the Soviet goods which we be-
lieve potentially available for export to the
US, it is almost certain that the Soviet Union
would have difficulty in increasing its ex-
change earning capacity. The US now ob-
tains from non-Communist sources virtually
all its imports of the raw materials mentioned
by Khrushchev. Further, for manganese and
chrome in particular — at one time major So-
viet exports to the US— many of the new
sources to which the US has turned have been
developed by US private and government
capital, and supplies appear ample. While
the USSR could undercut existing prices of
these materials, it would have to be wary of
charges of dumping, which could result in
additional US restrictions. While the Soviet
leaders would probably be willing to sell some
types of machinery in which they have made
innovations, there would not be enough of
Such items to yield a significant return. The
Soviets would be unlikely to make the effort
necessary to market ordinarily competitive
types of machinery and equipment in quantity
to US importers.

11. Existing US measures tending to restrict
US-USSR trade also pose a formidable obsta-
cle to any increase in such trade. Congress
has enacted laws under which the import of
crabmeat and certain furs of Soviet origin is
prohibited and most-favored-nation (MEN)
tariff treatment is specifically denied the So-
viet Union, thus depriving it of the tariff bene-
fits negotiated since 1934. The lack of MFN
tariff treatment would be a most significant
obstacle to US imports of manganese ore and
ferroalloys from the USSR. More important,
perhaps, it would hinder US imports of Soviet
goods which have not historically been part
of US-USSR trade but which would probably *
have to enter the trade to finarice a really sub-
stantial volume of Soviet purchases here. The
USSR and other communist countries also
place a high symbolic value on MEN treat-
ment and would undoubtedly make it a major
objective in any trade negotiations with the
US. US export controls continue to be more
stringent than those recently agreed to by the
members of COCOM. Finally, the Battle and
Johnson Acts prohibit governmental and pri-
vate loans to the USSR; under present legal
interpretations US exporters or banks could
grant no more than 180-day commercial credit
to the Soviet Union. a

12. Even if the US government acted to facili-
tate trade with the USSR, the response of US
private industry is uncertain. It would obvi-
ously depend in the first instance on the
Profitability of specific deals.- Even so, many
US importers would probably be reluctant to
switch from established sources of supply,
especially in view of their uncertainty as to
the permanence and reliability of the USSR
as a source. Many US manufacturers would
be reluctant to give the Soviets access to
equipment embodying advanced technology,
fearing that the Russians would choose to
compete in third country markets. Others,
feeling that trade with the USSR would be
sporadic and risky, might be reluctant to un-
dertake the retooling and plant modification
necessary to meet Soviet specifications.
Finally, American private business often fore-
sees public relations difficulties in trade with
the USSR, even though the transaction may

—GODLE LODE DLLs
Page-7
Cave 4

be entirely legal, and therefore would prob-
ably move cautiously in the matter.

13. As to the permanence of Soviet desire for
expanded trade with the US and other ad-
vanced countries, pre-1941 performance sug-
gests that the fear of a one-shot operation, or
at least of highly irregular Soviet levels of
demand, is well-founded. Khrushchev’s offer
emphasized the Soviet desire to buy plant,
equipment, and technology rather than fin-
ished products, and it may be that in many
areas the Soviets would proceed to produce
their own and not draw further on the West.
However, it appears likely that the West will
continue to develop a variety of processes at-
tractive to the USSR; imports of Western ma-
chinery would also, as a practical matter, ease
the pressure which growing internal develop-
ment and demands from other Bloc countries
have placed on Soviet machinery and equip-
ment industries. Hence, the aggregate of So-
viet demand for machinery and equipment
should continue and even grow at a fairly
steady pace. Moreover, while the Soviets still
adhere basically to a doctrine of self-suffi-
ciency, they have in fact attained this goal in
virtually all key sectors of the economy, in
terms of capacity for emergency purposes,
and can thus afford to accept a degree of de-
pendence on the West in non-critical fields.
Thus, there may be a continuing growth in
Soviet willingness to buy finished products
from the West.

14. In view of these conflicting factors, it is
clearly impossible to make any firm prediction
of the extent to which US trade with the USSR
might realistically be expected to increase.
For the purposes of this paper, we believe it
Teasonable to assume that if the US encour-
aged such trade by taking administrative ac-
tion to liberalize export licensing policy and
to minimize import discriminations, exports to
the USSR might expand to about $100-150
million annually over the space of the next
few years, This figure reflects an estimate of
Soviet requirements for imported machinery
in light of their Seven Year Plan, and a con-
sideration of the possible magnitude of Soviet

exports to the US.! While the USSR would
probably not be able to balance trade at this
level by its own direct export of goods to the
US, it could make up the residual amount by
reexports, transfers of free exchange, and by
selling more gold to the Free World. This
assumption of a trade expanded to $100-150
million does not allow for an increase which
might occur if US credits and MEN tariff
treatment were made available to the
USSR — developments which would require
legislative rather than merely administrative
action.

Ul. EFFECTS WITHIN THE BLOC OF

INCREASED US-USSR TRADE

A. Economic

15. Should the USSR import machinery and
equipment from the US in approximately the
assumed amounts, it would of course gain cer-
tain advantages. We cannot, however, give
any exact estimate of the size or extent of
these advantages. The total value of the im-
ports— $150 millio—is an insignificant
percentage of the total value of Soviet domes-
tic production of machinery and equip-
ment — $25 billion. Moreover, the net gain
to the USSR would be but a small proportion _
of the $150 million, since the imports would
have to be paid for by exports drawn from the
Soviet domestic economy. It is clear, however,
that the advantages accruing to the USSR
would be greater than these figures indicate
to the extent that the Soviet imported com-
plete plants of advanced design, or types of
machinery and equipment they themselves
had never produced. Such imports would per-
mit savings of development capital and of the
time of relatively scarce trained personnel.
By importing complete plants, the USSR
could reduce the time needed to reach a full
production run.

16. The effects of increased trade in terms of
output of specific industrial categories or of
specific commodities would depend wholly on
decisions made by the Soviet leaders. Soviet
leaders would be able to use the new equip-

‘See annex, Possible Size and Composition of US-
Soviet Trade.

CORLL
Page-8
CRED Paleiealant 5

ment either to increase output or to reduce
the cost of production at the existing level.
The Soviet leaders would also, in some cases,
have the option of using the imported ma-
chinery either to facilitate an expansion of
consumers goods production or to increase
output of commodities for use in more basic
industries. Importation of plant for the
petrochemical industry would assist Soviet
efforts to shift from agricultural products to
petroleum as the principal source of raw ma-
terials for the production of synthetic rubber,
alcohol, and other chemical products.

17. With respect to military production, we
assume US export controls will prevent the
movement to the USSR of strategic commodi-
ties. On this basis the increase in trade
Projected in this estimate would have slight
effect on the Soviet military potential. How-
ever, improvements in the chemical and syn-
thetic industries, for example, would make for
some additional flexibility in the range of ma-
terials available for military production and
might cut the costs of production of these or
other items.

18. Increased trade with the US, of the as-
sumed level and character, would have little
effect on Soviet trade with the underdevel-
oped countries or with the rest of the Bloc.
The bulk of Soviet exports to these countries
consists of arms and military equipment, raw
materials, and basic industrial machinery and
equipment; it does not include technologically
advanced equipment of the type which the
Soviet Union apparently hopes to obtain from
the US.

B. Political

19. The postulated expansion of US-USSR
trade, by itself, would probably have little or
no impact on the attitude of Soviet leaders or
of the Soviet public toward the US. Even if
the gains from this increased trade were
turned largely toward improving the Soviet
Standard of living, the USSR’s own contribu-
tion to such a program would be so large that
the US contribution, even if publicly admitted,
Would be almost completely overshadowed.

20. We do not believe that an increase of trade
between the US and the USSR would have any
appreciable political or economic effect upon
the European Satellites or upon Communist
China. The governments of the European
Satellites might, if they saw US-USSR trade
expanding, seek to increase the trade of their
own countries with the US, and they would
probably expect neither the US nor the USSR
to pose any insuperable political objection to
such an increase. Some of the people of the
European Satellites might be discouraged by
evidence of improving relations between the
US and the USSR; we believe, however, that
such an effect would not_be of long-term
significance.

IV. EFFECTS ON THE NON-COMMUNIST
WORLD OF THE INCREASED US-USSR
TRADE

21. From a political point of view, most non-
Communist countries would Probably welcome
the prospect of an increase in trade between
the US and the USSR. They would view it as
a sign that world tensions were relaxing, and
that the danger of war was lessening. Many
of them would consider that the US had come
around to a more realistic trade policy. At
the same time, it is virtually certain that some
elements in many countries, and the govern-
ments at least of South Korea and Nation-
alist China, would regard the development as
signifying another capitulation by the US to
the USSR. The Japanese government would
be highly resentful that the US government
had changed its own policy after pressing the
Japanese to move cautiously in their trade
with the Bloc and to minimize their political
and economic relations with Communist
China. Many underdeveloped countries would
be even less willing than they are today to
listen to US warnings concerning the dangers
of expanding economic relations with the
Bloc. Reactions would be affected to a con-
siderable extent by the timing and handling
of the US move and the circumstances of the
international situation. But in the final
analysis, the view taken by most countries
would depend largely upon the impact which
the increase of US-USSR trade had upon the
trade of these countries.

CO L
Page-9
22. Should the US export to the USSR the
types of goods which we discuss in the Annex
to this paper, it would find itself in competi-
tion with Western European and perhaps Jap-
anese exporters. If this competition led to a
reduction of presently existing levels of West-
ern European or Japanese exports to the USSR
it would certainly become an irritant in US
relations with the countries concerned. It is
probable, however, that the total amount of
Soviet imports from the non-Communist world
would increase sufficiently to allow not only
for the projected increase in imports from the
US, but for an increase of imports from other
countries as well. Moreover, the US is now in
competition with Western European exporters
in many third areas without giving rise to
serious political problems. We believe, there-
fore, that increased US exports to the USSR
would not lead to significant political difficulty
with other non-Communist countries. Never-
theless, it is possible that irritations could
arise from this cause, especially if the general
level of trade in the Free World was low.
There might also be certain particular lines of
US exports which would displace the corre-
sponding lines of certain other countries.

 

\

Ce eo 6

Finally, the possibility cannot be excluded
that the USSR itself would deliberately take
US goods and exclude the goods of certain
other countries in order to cause friction in the
Western alliance. :

23. As for US imports from the USSR, some
countries selling to the US would be adversely
affected by competition of Soviet raw mate-
rials in the US market. There would be minor
reductions in the dollar earnings in some
cases, but at the levels of US-Soviet trade we
have postulated the effect would in general be
small. It would be necessary to consider, how-
ever, whether a substantial increase in US im-
ports of some specific commodity from the
USSR might seriously damage the trade or the
foreign exchange position of some particular
Free World country. For example, substan-
tial US imports of manganese from the USSR
might displace imports of the same commodity
from India, and imports of forest products
from the USSR might displace those from
Scandinavia. The degree of such displace-
ment, and its political and economic effects,
could only be judged after study of the par-
ticular commodities involved and of the trade
patterns which would be disturbed.
Page-10
Coded iade elie NaTiletloneny 7

ANNEX

POSSIBLE LEVEL AND COMPOSITION OF FUTURE US-SOVIET TRADE

A. Level of Trade

In recent years Soviet imports of machinery
and equipment have probably averaged six to
seven percent of the domestic production of
these goods. (See Table I.) Assuming that
the ratio remains roughly the same, Soviet
imports of machinery and equipment in 1962
from other Bloc countries as well as from the
Free World would amount to about 2 billion
dollars, more than twice their present volume.
However, in part because of increasing Chi-
nese and underdeveloped areas demand for
European Satellite machinery exports, the
USSR in the future will probably purchase a
higher proportion of its machinery and equip-

ment imports from the Free World. In these
circumstances, it is not unlikely that by 1962
Soviet imports of machinery and equipment
from the Free World could increase to about
30 percent of the total import of such goods
or approximately $600 million, as compared to
about 25 percent in 1956. (See Table IL.) Of
estimated total imports from the Free World
in 1962, it is assumed that not more than 25
percent, or a maximum of $150 million, would
come from the United States— this would
amount to an increase in the relative impor-
tance of Soviet imports of machinery and
equipment purchased in the US from one per-
cent to 20-25 percent of total imports of such
goods from the Free World.

TABLE I

 

SOVIET INVESTMENT, PRODUCTION AND IMPORTS OF MACHINERY ND os
EQUIPMENT 1955-57 AND 1962
(Billions of 1955 dollars)

 

Import as a percent

 

 

 

 

 

Year Investment Production Imports of Production of Investment
1955 12.2 11.9 0.9 8 qT
1956 15.5 15.2 0.9 6 6
1957 > 17.3 171 LL 6 6
1962 * 25.0-28.0 24-26.3 1.5-2.0 6-7 6-6
v — preliminary
* — estimate
TABLE II
SOVIET IMPORTS OF MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT
(In million US dollars and percent of total)
1955, 1956 1962
Value Percent Value Percent Value Percent

Sino-Soviet Bloc 144 80.4 666 * 14.4% 1,400 70.0
Free World 181 19.6 229 25.6 600 30.0

Total 925 100.0 895 100.0 2,000 700.0

 

equipment was
of the East European revolts.

 

* The decreasing share of the Satellites in total Soviet imports of machinery and
undoubtedly accelerated in 1956 by the economic dislocations

\eowiprl
Page-11
Co BiaiininideliedL DLLeh 8

B. Composition of Trade

Although Khrushchev made only the most
general comments concerning the commodity
composition of an expanded trade, we believe
that on the basis of known Soviet priorities
during the forthcoming Seven Year Plan the
following would constitute a reasonable esti-
mate of the major categories of goods in-
volved in the trade.

Percent
of total

20-25%

20-25%

15-20%

10-15%

10-15%

 

1. Soviet Imports from the US

Iron ore processing and steel rolling
mill plants and equipment: The
USSR has need for such equipment
to relieve the strain on the already
overburdened machine building in-
dustry and it is generally conceded
that US has technological superi-
ority in iron ore processing.

Chemical processing plants and
equipment: The low technological
level of the Soviet petrochemical in-
dustry and plans for its substantial
development by 1965 assures a rela-
tively high priority to such imports.

Refrigeration and food processing
equipment: The use of refrigeration
equipment for the chemical and
food industries (both of which are
scheduled for considerable expan-
sion by 1965) and US superiority in
this field rank such equipment high
on Soviet shopping lists in the US.

Equipment for production of syn-
thetic fiber and for the production
of yarn, fabric, and clothing from
natural and synthetic fiber: Soviet
interest in such equipment is un-
doubtedly motivated by desire to im-
prove Soviet standard of living. Al-
though orders for such equipment
would more likely be placed in West-
ern Europe, the USSR has already
exhibited an interest in purchasing
US textile plants.

Metal cutting and forming machine
tools; mining and construction ma-
chinery; timber, pulp and paper

20-30%

20-25 %

10%

producing plants and equipment;
miscellaneous consumer goods, Pos-
sibly including foodstufis.

2. Soviet Exports to the US

Ferroalloys, ferroalloy ores, and con-
centrates: The United States has
traditionally been a major importer
of Soviet ferroalloy ores and concen-
trates. In the pre-war period, for
example, more than 25 percent of
total Soviet manganese exports
were purchased by the US. Pre-
sumably, Soviet exports of man-
ganese and chrome ores could again
be expanded to méet any increased
US demand. However, because of
the hiatus in Soviet-American trade
during the 1948-58 period, any‘ re-
sumption of large US purchases
would entail a shift from now well-
established sources of supply lo-
cated primarily in underdeveloped
areas.

Coal tar chemicals and petroleum
products: Benzene has accounted
for approximately 40 percent of So-
viet exports to the US in recent
years. However, because benzene is
consumed in the production of syn-
thetic organic chemicals, production
of which will rise rapidly in the
USSR by 1965, it is expected that
total Soviet benzene exports will
tend to level off, if not decline, by
1965. Petroleum and petroleum
products, however, will continue to
be the most readily available of all
Soviet potential exports.

Furs and forest products: Tradition-
ally a large item in Soviet exports
to the US, in recent years fur ex-
ports have fluctuated between 30-
60 percent of the total, and present-
ly amount to about $4 million. It
is estimated that exports in this
group could amount to about 10
percent of the total in 1962 ($10 to
15 million).

Ceeebialinbe eld Selevinlen
Page-12
15%

Cdl Delo 9

Precious Metals (other than gold)

trade, their relative shares in such

(5%), cotton linters and waste trade would measurably increase.
(5%) and miscellaneous (5%): 15.30% Residual: A Soviet net import sur-
Platinum and platinum group met- plus from the US could be settled
als, like cotton linters and waste, by means of gold sales, sales in the
have each averaged approximately US of commodities purchased from
5% of total US imports from the third countries, or credits. Soviet
USSR. There is little likelihood gold resources are estimated to be
that given the absolute increases adequate to meet a residual on this
provided in an expanding US-USSR order of magnitude.
wheeleedintinldoetiod Ladies
Page-13
