
Page-1
184

COPY NO.

sect . FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR

FOR REPORTS AND ESTIMATES -

7 . Prue
IMPORTANCE TO THE US
OF LATIN AMERICAN
CIVIL AIR TRANSPORT

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

 

ORE 22-49
Published 2 October 1950

      
  

This Socweent has bean
approved for release throught
the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of
the Central Iintelligesca Agency.

Tee “pe
we me (fee

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Docu
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a.

areane

Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission.

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other

Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with

applicable

security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by

arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board
Page-3
ORE 22-49
IMPORTANCE TO THE US OF LATIN AMERICAN CIVIL AIR TRANSPORT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

ESTIMATE 2000. cee eB
DEFINITIONS . 2 0. ee ee ee 8
ANNEX—INTRODUCTION 2. 6. ee ee ee ee

Table A—Equipment of Latin American Scheduled Airlines. . - . - - + + +: 15
Table B—Comparative Weekly Scheduled Mileage of Airlines . - . . 15
Table C—International Air Agreements Concluded by Latin ‘American Countries - . 16
Table D—Ownership of Airlines—South America . ©. - 2 eee ee te 17
Table E—Ownership of Airlines—Middle America . . . . .- 1. - - + + + 18

Appendixes

A— Argentina 2 2 6 1 ee 19
B— Bolivia 2... ee ee ee 25
c — Brazil eee a feet neem en
D— Chile 2. 2 1. 1 we ee 37
E— Colombia 2... ee 8
F— CostaRica. 2 6 ee ee ee ee 49
G— Cuba. . oS .
H— Dominican Republic. A 2
I—KEcuador. . 1) ee ee ee ee ee 1
J—ElSalvador 2.) ee ee 65
K— Guatemala. 2 2 6 ee ee ee ee 8T
L— Haiti. 2 2 ee ee TL
M— Honduras... 1) ee ee BB
N— Mexico 2 2 2 0 ee ee ee TT
O— Nicaragua 2 2 6 ee 85
P— Panama... 2. ee ee ee BT
Q— Paraguay 2 6 6 ee 91
R— Peru . 2. ee ee 93
S— Uruguay 2 6. 99
T— Venezuela . . . Soe ee ee eee es 108
U — Airlines of British Colonies and Puerto Rico Soe ee ee ee ee 109

ener
Page-4
nese

LIST OF GRAPHICS Page
Potential Airlift Contribution of Latin American Civil Air Transport . . . 2. 4
Principal Increase in Scheduled Weekly LA. Mileage from’40to’49 2 2 2 2... 18
Airlines of Argentina . . . : : Fo ee ee ew 88
Organization for Civil Aviation (Brazil) + | -|-|-|- | > | «J «|-|.). | | 130
Airlines of Brazil . . Se 88
Organization for Civil Aviation (Chile) pte te beg ot gt tt
Airlines of Chile . . . Fo ee 40
Organization for Civil Aviation (Colombia) Boe ee ee eee. 48
Airlines of Colombia... - 2... ee
Airlines of Costa Rica © 2. ee 80
Airlines of Cuba. 2 we 8B
Airlines of Ecuador... 2. ee 63
Airlines of Honduras . . 2...) ee
Airlines of Mexico. 2 2 2. 2 80
The TACA System .. . Foe. 90
Organization for Civil Aviation (Peru) a:
Airlines of Peru. . Be ee OT
Organization for Civil Aviation * (Uruguay) a
Airlines of Uruguay . . Fe 101
Organization for Civil Aviation (Venezuela) a coe eee ee ee. 108
Proposed Re-organization for Civil Aviation (Venezuela) toe ee ee ee. 104
Airlines of Venezuela . . Fo ee eee. 107
Airlines of the British Colonies and Puerto Rico Fo ee ee. 109

MAPS

The following maps, which supplement the information contained in the appendixes, are
enclosed in a separate envelope:

Latin American Routes of Airlines Wholly or Partly US Owned
Airline Routes in South America

Airline Routes in Middle America

International Airline Operations in the South American Area
International Airline Operations in the Middle American Area

sugnt
Page-5
gEcret

IMPORTANCE TO THE US OF LATIN AMERICAN CIVIL AIR TRANSPORT

SUMMARY

In case of war with the USSR, US military
airlift requirements will exceed the capabili-
ties of available US civil and military transport
aircraft. Under these circumstances, the
Latin American countries could and probably
would provide a considerable number of multi-
engine passenger and cargo transports for
military airlift operations within the Central-
South American area which would somewhat
reduce this deficiency. Thus, within 60 days
the Latin American airlines could assume the
major portion of the military airlift require-
ments within that area, thereby releasing US
aircraft for operations elsewhere. In addi-
tion, Latin America might contribute a small
number of four-engine aircraft for military
lift on the trans-Atlantic runs. If the Latin
American contribution were limited to twin-
engine aircraft, it is estimated that as many as
275 planes could be furnished, of which a max-
imum of 175 would be cargo types. This twin-
engine cargo fleet could be employed to trans-
port critical strategic materials from the
interior of Latin America to seaboard trans-
shipment points, and in the event of serious
disruption of ocean shipping by enemy action,
it could fly such materials directly to North
America.

In time of peace, Latin American civil avia-
tion is of some secondary importance to the
US because it: (a) aids in the economic de-
velopment of an area exceeded only by Europe
as a market for US exports; and (b) provides
a limited market for US transport aircraft of
all types, thus slightly increasing the level of
activity in the US aviation industry. Most
Latin American countries, furthermore, have
adopted in international agreements the lib-
eral aviation principles sponsored by the US
throughout the world, and thus have indi-
rectly facilitated unimpeded international air
traffic, which is a prerequisite to the maximum
development of US commercial air carriers.

Expected trends in Latin American civil
aviation unfavorable to the US are: a reduction
in Latin American purchases of US aviation
equipment owing to the dollar shortage and
the competition now being offered to US ex-
porters by foreign aircraft manufacturers; and
a tendency among certain Latin American
countries to adopt restrictive measures against
foreign air carriers. The latter development
would give impetus to similar restrictive tend-
encies already evident in other parts of the
world, thus eventually threatening the struc-
ture of US world air routes.

Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air

Force have concurred in this report.

1950 and in the Appendixes as of 15 November 1949.

The information in the estimate is.as of 1 March

Important changes since these

closure dates have been added as footnotes.

Sooner

a
Page-6
IMPORTANCE TO THE US OF LATIN AMERICAN CIVIL AIR TRANSPORT

1. Strategic Considerations.

In case of war, a major airlift would prob-
ably be required to support US objectives, con-
ceivably in widely Separated areas. The
strain on the airlift capacity of the US in an
emergency will be such that help from other
sources will be of considerable strategic signifi-
cance. Despite its relative backwardness,
Latin American civil aviation is capable of
making such a contribution to military airlift
Operations within the Central-South American
area. Between 20 and 50 percent of the Latin
American 550-plane transport fleet could and
probably would be made available in a reason-
ably short time.

There are sound reasons to anticipate that
all Latin American countries, in varying de-
grees of effective cooperation, would be aligned
with the US in the event of war with the USSR.
The degree and promptness of their coopera-
tion would depend in part upon the circum-
stances out of which the emergency arose, but
assistance would be immediately offered with
sincere intentions if an attack occurred within
the Western Hemisphere.

Because most of the governments concerned
regulate private airlines and because there is
also a certain amount of US influence in a
number of important companies,* there
should be little difficulty in diverting the
planes to wartime use.

Given contracts protecting sovereignty and
guaranteeing against loss, co-belligerent Latin
American countries could be expected to ac-
cept as large a diversion of civil aircraft to
joint war purposes as would the US under sim-
ilar circumstances, despite the fact that air

 

* Although US investments are proportionately
not large, the actual influence of the US in the air
transport industry of Latin America exceeds that
Suggested by the direct ownership participation of
US interests, largely as a consequence of the con-
siderable indebtedness of numerous airlines to their
US stockholders.

transport is normally of more critical impor-
tance to Latin American countries than are
other media of transportation.*

The most urgent US need in case of a major
emergency would almost certainly be for four-
engine aircraft capable of transoceanic opera-
tions. Of the multi-engine US-built trans-
ports now operated by Latin American civil air
carriers, about 50, or approximately 10 per-
cent of the total, are four-engine aircraft.
This number is roughly one-eighth of those
now operated by all US scheduled domestic
and international airlines and, assuming a
proportionate diversion to wartime use, would
increase by one-eighth the airlift contribution
in four-engine aircraft made by US scheduled
airlines. Apart from the mere number of
these Latin American aircraft, moreover, their
strategic value to the US would be substan-
tially enhanced by virtue of the fact that more
than half are adapted for long-range overwa-
ter operations. Their employment on trans-
oceanic airlift missions would thus not require ©
the time-consuming structural modifications
which would be necessary for a large part of
the US domestic fleet.

The maximum estimate for availability of
the Latin American civil transports to the US
is 50 percent, the minimum, 20 percent. The
first figure is supported by the consideration
that the bulk of the Latin American fleet is
owned by those countries—Brazil, Chile, and
Mexico, for example—tlikely to be most closely
associated with the US in time of war;
the second takes into account the increased
wartime transport demands of the countries

 

* Certain variables, such as the operating condi-
tion of the aircraft at any given time and the
feasibility of their rapid conversion from Passenger
to cargo use or vice versa, which would have to be
considered in precise logistic planning, are omitted
here. They are beyond the scope of this analysis,
which is intended solely to indicate the order of
magnitude of the possible Latin American airlift
contribution.

SperiT 3

Lo 2 olan
Page-7
4 : secfer

themselves,* as well as any combination of un- :

favorable circumstances that would be likely
to arise. On the basis of these estimates,
Latin America could furnish a minimum of
110 and a maximum of 275 transport aircraft,
predominantly of twin-engine types.** If it is
assumed that cargo lift would be more impor-
tant than passenger operations, it is reason-
able to suppose that of the 110-plane mini-
mum, sixty cargo-type aircraft would be avail-
able and of the 275 maximum, 175. Calculat-
ing on a reasonable basis of operating effi-
ciency on a hypothetical run between the US
Atlantic seaboard and Brazil, for example, the
lift capacity of 60 C-47’s would be 810 tons a

 

*In addition to the 550 civilian aircraft already
mentioned, there are about 180 US-built transports,
most of which are structurally suited to both cargo
and passenger operations, which are attached to
the various Latin American armed forces, and could
be drawn on for airlift purposes or employed by
Latin American countries as replacements for di-
verted civil transports.

** See Table I, page 7.

month; of 175 C-47’s, 2,365 tons. For the car-
rying of passengers, on the other hand, a mini-
mum of 100 or a maximum of 250 planes of
this type could be expected, capable of carry-
ing between 10,800 and 27,000 troops per
month on a hypothetical run between Miami
and Natal. In the event of circumstances re-
quiring either type of operation, the continued
existence of the extensive and well-organized
chain of airfields and other facilities on the
Brazilian north coast and through the Carib-
bean would be a consideration of the highest
importance to the US.

Particularly if bilateral arrangements had
been made before war began, a majority of the
Latin American aircraft could be made avail-
able to the US in a short time. Because of

the low standards of efficiency and’ mainte-
nance prevailing in many Latin American air-
lines, however, and the organizational prob-
lems involved, it would take at least sixty days
before the full capacity of these planes would
be utilized.

 

 
 

Latin American countries.

Maximum available for

Passenger
Airplanes

Multi-engine U.S, built passenger and
cargo transport aircraft operated by

     
  
    
    
  
   

  
   

_ 2,365 tons*
i ae 5
1TTSBURGH 7 strategic

™ material

*Per month

 

aefner
Page-8
speaur 5

The present trend toward replacing US air-
craft with foreign types, if continued, would
somewhat hamper the effectiveness of a Latin
American contribution in case of emergency
because of the difference in flight and mainte-
nance procedures and the need of obtaining
parts abroad. If, however, the Latin Ameri-
can fleet were used as a self-contained unit in
purely South American operations from its
normal bases, the effect would be less impor-
tant.

Although it is impossible to foresee the many
US requirements for emergency airlift ca-
pacity, one possible use of the Latin American
air fleet directiy affecting US security interests
would be the transport of certain critical stra-
tegic materials from remote sources to sea-
board transshipment points or, in case of ex-
treme emergency, from Latin America directly
tothe US. Current stocks of most of the stra-
tegic materials in the US stockpiling program
are considerably short of objectives, and there
is no immediate prospect of meeting these
goals. The present unfulfilled objectives,
moreover, are subject to drastic upward revi-
sicn at any time as the result, for example, of
scientific or technological progress. Reduc-
tion in the availability of strategic materials
from normal sources is also possible. The fall
of Southeast Asia to the Communists, for ex-
ample, would render increased US access to
South American production critically impor-
tant. Other sources of materials to which the
US has external lines of communication might
be cut off by hostile submarine action or Com-
munist sabotage.

Use of the Latin American airlift for emer-
gency transport of strategic materials is en-
tirely feasible. Such an airlift would probably
be directed toward commodities for which the
US requirement is relatively small and for
which the limited airlift capacity would be best
suited. Latin American sources of such mate-
rials are already being exploited and are in
many cases capable of expanded production,
while airfield installations have already been
constructed in locations within reach of
needed materials. Although the majority of
Latin American airfields are not suitable for
four-engine aircraft, most are capable of ac-
commodating sustained operations by twin-

engine aircraft, which are those in largest
Latin American supply and most. likely to be
used in a strategic materials airlift. Since
twin-engine planes constitute the least strin-
gent US requirement, their use in a strategic
material lift would not seriously prejudice the
primary airlift commitment. Moreover, in
case of a catastrophe such as the breakdown
of ocean transport, twin-engine aircraft could
be diverted from their most logical use in a
strategic material airlift (production site to
seaboard) to an operation from Latin Ameri-
can to North American destinations, whereas
they could not satisfactorily transport mass
cargoes from sites overseas. The strategic
value of the Latin American airlift in such ex-
traordinary circumstances is illustrated by the
fact that these aircraft, which are capable of
transporting 2,365 tons per month if operated
from Brazil to the US (see p. 4), could deliver a
volume of beryl, quartz crystals, tantalite,
tungsten, zircon (baddeleyite), columbite and
vanadium 75 percent greater than the average
monthly US imports from all sources in 1948.
In the event of a sustained operation, more-
over, cargo capacity could be increased some-
what by the conversion of passenger aircraft
to cargo use.

2. Economic Considerations.

The principal long-range economic signifi-
cance of civil aviation in Latin America, from
the US point of view, stems from its role in
providing rapid intra-area communications.
Aviation develops and maintains the economies
of backward and isolated areas, and otherwise
promotes the economic stability of the Latin
American nations, particularly in view of their
inadequate surface transport and the geo-
graphic obstacles to their economic unifica-
tion. As an important factor in promoting
the economic welfare of an area which is ex-
ceeded as a market for US exports by Europe
alone, the continued development of Latin
American civil aviation is, therefore, clearly
to the long-range advantage of the US.

There are other factors of secondary eco-
nomic importance to the US. The area con-
stitutes a market for the sale of new and used
US transport aircraft, spare aircraft parts, and
other aviation equipment as evidenced by the
fact that about 90 percent of the present

ofan
Page-9
6 am secfet

Latin American transport fleet is of US manu-
facture. US exports of all types of transport
aircraft to Latin America totaled about $41.1
million for the three-year period 1947-9.*
This volume represented roughly 27 percent of
the dollar value of all US exports in this cate-
gory during these three years, thus constitut-
ing a significant portion of the overseas mar-
ket for US transport aircraft, and it was appre-
ciably supplemented by the sale of spare parts
and equipment. Because of the vital need to
maintain the US aircraft industry at the high-
est possible peacetime level in order to mini-
mize the required wartime expansion, any for-
eign markets for planes or for engines and
parts are significant, particularly in view of
the rapid downward trend in US civil trans-
port production since 1947.

The bulk of recent sales to Latin America
has been of US war surplus stocks, and the
actual purchase of new planes during the
three-year period was not large (only about
8 percent of US civil transport output), but
the very fact that most of the planes were not
new is of some significance, because it prom-
ises an accelerated demand for replacements.
The present US-made Latin American civil
transport fleet (DC-3 and larger) is about 50
percent of that now operated by all US sched-
uled airlines, indicating a replacement demand
at least half the size of that in the US. Con-
sidering the need for new and modern planes
to replace obsolescent ones, thus increasing
the average unit volume of the aircraft sold,
and the high replacement demand for new
engines and parts, the Latin American mar-
ket could, in coming years, have a considera-
ble effect on maintenance of the US industry,
despite the fact that the rate of expansion of
the area’s air fleet is expected to be moderate.

The above estimate, however, is made with-
out reference to the competition that US man-
ufacturers must meet. The prevalent Latin
American dollar shortage plus the competitive
advantage accruing to British and other Euro-
pean manufacturers through currency devalu-
ation create a strong temptation in Latin
America to buy in other than US mar-
kets. These factors have already tended
to favor increased Latin American purchases

* See Table II, page 7.

of military equipment and machinery from
Europe. Furthermore, current production in
Europe of small aircraft particularly suitable
for Latin American feeder-line operations,
some of which have already been sold in the
area, and the probable introduction to the
Latin American market of Canadian or British
jet transports in advance of such US types will
increase the competition. Since Latin Ameri-
can purchases of new aircraft in the near fu-
ture are not expected to be extensive, however,
any trend away from US equipment will de-
velop gradually and its effects on the US air-
craft industry may not be appreciable for sev-
eral years.

With respect to its economic significance as
an outlet for US investments, Latin American
civil aviation does not offer an attractive mar-
ket for venture capital. The declining US
financial stake in Latin American-flag airlines,
most of which are capitalized at comparatively
iow levels, is estimated now to be less than $20
million, on the basis of the nominal value of
stock holdings. This situation is in part the
result of the enactment and enforcement by
many Latin American countries of legislation
requiring majority stock ownership and. effec-
tive control of national-fiag airlines to be held
by interests of the same nationality. The
policy of establishing national control over
civil air activities is consistent with the efforts
of the Latin American countries toward eco-
nomic autarchy in other directions, as mani-
fested by their attempts to develop local in-
dustry, their preference for government-to-
government loans or grants, and their pro-
nounced prejudice against admission of for-
eign capital except under restrictions unlikely
to appeal to foreigners.

3. Political Considerations.

Civil air relations between the US and Latin
America have also a subsidiary political impor-
tance in that Latin America’s technical de-
pendence upon the US in aviation matters
during and after the war has resulted in a
marked US influence in civil air affairs. Al-
though there is evidence that this influence
is declining as Latin American capabilities are
developed, close cooperation between the two
areas in aviation matters has contributed to

sforer
Page-10
sugher 7

their generally cordial relations and remains .

a potential means of sustaining them. Fac-
tors promoting close relations, in addition to
the increased economic intercourse devel-
oped through exchange of airline services,
have been the negotiation of reciprocal air
agreements, and the establishment of US tech-
nical assistance missions in Latin America and
training programs for Latin American person-
nel in the US.

A prime objective of postwar US aviation
policy has been the facilitation of freedom of
international movement for US commercial
air carriers under conditions conducive to
their maximum development. In general, bi-
lateral agreements negotiated by the US with
major Latin American civil air powers embody
“liberal” principles, favorable to US aviation
interests. In turn, Latin American agree-

Taste I
ESTIMATED LATIN AMERICAN CONTRIBUTION
TO EMERGENCY AIRLIFT

 

 

 

 

MINIMUM NUMBER | MAXIMUM NUMBER
AIRCRAPT AIRCRAFT
AVAILABLE AVAILABLE
(20% Basis) (50% Basis)
110 215
Cargo |Personnell Cargo | Personnel
_ Priority*| Priority*| Priority*] Priority*
Cargo Aircraft. 60 10 175 25
Passenger Air-
craft... 50 100 100 250

ments with European countries have generally
conformed to the US standard type. Asa re-
sult, designated US airlines have been assured
freedom.of movement throughout most of
Latin America, and the US case in sponsoring
world-wide liberal air principles has been con-
siderably strengthened in other areas less sub-
ject than Latin America to US influence.

There is no assurance, however, that this
trend will continue. As the Latin American
lines, already financially weak, encounter in-
creasing foreign competition, they are likely to
adopt more restrictive policies toward foreign
carriers. Moreover, the quondam opposition
of certain Latin American countries to a mul-
tilateral air agreement, which was being
strongly advocated by the US, indicates that
opposition from this area to US objectives in
international air conferences is not excluded.
Should this change take place, it would give
impetus to a similar movement already evi-
dent in other parts of the world and thus
might eventually threaten the whole structure
of US world air routes.

Taste II

US TRANSPORT AIRCRAFT EXPORTED TO
LATIN AMERICA

 

 

 

 

 

 

* This is a breakdown of minimum and maximum figures
into a further estimate of the distribution between cargo
and passenger aircraft which would be made available
should priority airlift requirements demand on the one
hand transport of cargo, and on the other hand transport
of personnel. These estimates are based on several
factors, including the fact that the Latin American civil
air Mect is made up of about 195 cargo aircraft and 360
passenger transports.

(Military and civil)
NEW USED AND
ineRaer SURPLUS TOTAL,
YEAR AIRCRAFT
;..| Dollar ite | Dollar Dollar
ts s S
Units Value | Uaits| Value Unit: Value
1947....... 20 3.4. 292 14.4 312 17.8
1948....... 27 69 198 8.6 225 15.5
1949...... 9 160 6.9 169 7.8
Three Year
Totals. 56 650 29.9 706 4.1

  

sybxer
Page-11
SEYRET

DEFINITIONS

The following terms pertaining to civil avia-
tion employed throughout this estimate are
herewith defined:

(a) Fifth Freedom. This controversial
principle concerns commercial air traffic privi-
leges accorded through international agree-
ment to an air carrier of one nation in the ter-
ritory of a second. Specifically, Fifth Free-
dom is the privilege of an air carrier of one
nation to take on in the territory of a second
country passengers, mail, and cargo destined
for a third state and, conversely, the privilege
to put down in a second nation passenger,
mail, and cargo originating in a third country.

(b) Bermuda Agreement. The Bermuda
Agreement was negotiated between the US
and UK in February 1946. It incorporated
certain liberal principles governing interna-
tional commercial air traffic, including a mu-
tual concession of Fifth Freedom privileges
and recognition of the right of fair and equal
opportunity to engage in air commerce under

\

competitive conditions. The US and UK have
Jointly promoted these principles throughout
the world and the Bermuda Agreement has
become the model for a large number of sub-
sequent international air agreements.

(c) Unduplicated Route Mileage. The fol-
lowing hypothetical case illustrates the man-
ner in which unduplicated route mileage is
computed. Two given routes, such as New
York-Habana-Panama and New York-Habana-
Caracas, having a common segment (New
York-Habana), are both operated by a single
airline. In computing the unduplicated route
mileage of this carrier the duplicated segment
(New York-Habana) is included in the airline’s
total only once. Moreover, this carrier’s un-
duplicated route mileage is not affected by the
fact that one or more other airlines operate
parallel routes. The term “unduplicated,”
therefore, refers only to those route miles
which are not duplicated by an individual air-
line.

SEZRET 9

Lp. $ blanks
Page-12
spent

ANNEX

INTRODUCTION

1. Historical Background.
a. Prewar Development.

Before World War II, civil air transport in
Latin America was developed, financed, and
to a large extent controlled by European and
North American interests. It was particu-
larly susceptible to foreign development be-
cause of the financial and technical inability
of most Latin American countries to develop
their own air services. Lack of adequate sur-
face transport, moreover, led Latin American
countries to encourage development of air
transport. Asa result, foreign interests (prin-
cipally German and US) established, operated,
and controlled extensive air networks under
liberal concessions. The capability of various
national interests in Latin America to provide
domestic air services gradually increased, how-
ever, with the result that by the outbreak of
World War II a trend was perceptible toward
the progressive restriction of privileges enjoyed
by foreign aviation interests.

b. Wartime Development.

Elimination of Axis Influence. With the
outbreak of the European war and the sub-
sequent military victories of the Axis, the
extensive penetration of Latin American civil
aviation by German-flag and German-con-
trolled airlines (which together flew three
million miles in 1940 over 27,000 route miles
throughout South America) became a source
of increasing concern to the US. Italian
trans-Atlantic services, furthermore, flew from
Rome to Natal, Rio de Janeiro and Buenos
Aires. Consequently, the US and various
Latin American governments cooperated to
eliminate all Axis influence gradually from
Latin American aviation. This was accomp-
lished through the progressive replacement
of Axis air services cither-with US airlines di-
rectly or with native services operated by US-
trained flight and ground personnel and

backed by US financial aid and technical as-
sistance.

As a result of these measures and the dis-
continuation of air services in Latin America
by other European interests, together with the
close wartime collaboration between the US
and Latin American governments, the US, at
the close of the war, enjoyed a virtual monop-
oly. of foreign influence over Latin American
aviation.

US Aid to Latin American Aviation. US-
Latin American collaboration in aviation
matters, instituted early in the war, has in-
cluded technical guidance as well as the train-
ing of pilots, mechanics, instructors, engineers,
and high-level administrative officers. US
civil air missions have also assisted in estab-
lishing and developing standardized air traffic
control and operational procedures, and have
provided technical advice on navigational aids,
radio communications, meteorological instal-
lations, and maintenance requirements.
Moreover, the US has advised certain Latin
American nations regarding the promulgation
of modern civil aviation regulations. This as-
sistance, together with the US-sponsored war-
time Airport Development Program, laid the
foundation for the rapid expansion of Latin
American airline operations.

c. Postwar Expansion of Airlines and Air
Facilities. .

The end of World War II initiated a period
of rapid and continuing expansion of national-
flag and foreign airline operations in Latin
America.

Increase in Latin American Airline Equip-
ment. As a result of having purchased mod-
ern aircraft from US postwar surplus stocks
at low cost, Latin American scheduled air-
lines in 1947 were operating over 400 more
aircraft, including 36 more 4-engine types,
than in 1940. (See Table A.) By early 1949
another 69 aircraft, including 22 additional

segher ul

Lp- lo blan}
Page-13
12 : sec yer

 

  
  
 

- 14,000 mi.

,000 mi. Inorease of 550%

4-engine transports were added, thus bring-
ing the total fleet operated by the area’s
scheduled airlines to approximately 700.

Although US-manufactured aircraft
amounted to 72 percent of the total owned by
Latin American scheduled airlines in 1940,
only 23 were as modern as the DC-3., In 1949,
six hundred aircraft, or 88 percent of the total,
were of US manufacture, and of these, 450
were of types at least as large and as modern
as the DC-3. (Aircraft of UK manufacture
in use in 1949 amounted to only 8 percent of
the Latin American transport total.) The
increase in US equipment operated by Latin
American airlines, moreover, would have been
even greater had it not been for the severe
dollar shortage which has recently prevailed
in most Latin American countries.

Although Latin American airlines operated
18 percent of the world total of scheduled air-
line equipment in 1949 (excluding the USSR),
their share of 4-engine aircraft amounted to
slightly less than 7 percent of the world total
of this type.

Increase in Latin American Airline Opera-
tions. Asa result of rapid postwar expansion,
Latin American scheduled airlines were oper-
ating in 1947 about four times more mileage
than in 1940. (See Table B.) By 1949, this
mileage had increased to over 15 million miles

 

 

 

 

1949 L.A. mileage compared
to total U.S. and total world
mileage.

 

ORE Tr-250

per week or more than five times that sched-
uled in 1940. The principal increases in
scheduled weekly mileage from 1940 to 1949
were made by the airlines of Argentina (an
increase of about 140,000 miles—1,400 per-
cent), Brazil (about 460,000 miles—over 700
percent) and Venezuela (about 170,000 miles—
over 1,500 percent). These countries have es-
tablished substantial intercontinental oper-
ations. Since 1940, the airlines of Mexico and
Cuba have also shown marked increases in
scheduled operations, amounting per week to
over 220,000 miles (300 percent) and over
70,000 miles (500 percent), respectively. The
total scheduled mileage in early 1949 for all
Latin American airlines amounted to slightly
less than 20 percent of the mileage flown by
all US scheduled domestic and international
carriers and about 11 percent of the world
total (exclusive of the USSR) of scheduled
operations.

Despite pronounced postwar expansion of
operations, Latin American airlines have been
limited by the general lack of public funds
throughout the area, and by the severe dollar
shortages which have affected most Latin
American countries during the last two years.
Government plans for badly needed develop-
ment and improvement of airports, radio aids
to navigation, and meteorological and com-

SEGRET
Page-14
segher 13

munications facilities have had to be realis-
tically adjusted to national budgets. Many
airlines, therefore, have been forced to develop
air installations at their own expense. As in-
dicated above, moreover, the recent dollar
shortage has also, by preventing the purchase
of desired new equipment from the US, to
some extent limited the expansion of airline
operations.

Increase in Operations of Foreign Airlines in
Latin America. The growing capability of
Latin-American carriers to provide services
throughout Latin America and to Europe and
the US has created an increasingly competi-
tive situation for foreign airlines operating to
Latin America. In addition, the postwar in-
auguration of Latin American operations by
six European carriers has gradually dissipated
the monopoly of foreign-flag services enjoyed
immediately after the war by the US in that
area. In spite of these developments, the
postwar Latin American operations of US
Scheduled airlines have expanded consider-
ably, partly as a result of the addition of new
routes, but principally because of the greatly
increased frequency and capacity of services
offered. Moreover, despite the growth of Latin
American-flag services, the scheduled mileage
of US-fiag airlines operating in Latin America
in 1949 was still about 50 percent of the domes-
tic and international mileage of all Latin
American-flag scheduled airlines combined.

2. Governmental Policy toward Civil Aviation.

With respect to the civil aviation Policies of
Latin American countries, the principal post-
war trends which affect US interests reflect
the increased capabilities of Latin American
air interests to provide adequate air transport
services. The development of national-flag
aviation has resulted in a growing Latin
American independence of foreign influence in
aviation matters and a desire to protect na-
tional airlines from intensive foreign com-
petition in international operations. In do-
mestic operations, moreover, all but two of the
Latin American countries which granted
cabotage privileges to foreign airlines have
withdrawn such rights, -thus reserving do-
mestic air traffic to national interests.

Government Promotion of Continued Ex-
pansion. Many Latin American countries are

promoting the development of adequate air
services to all parts of their territories and in
this respect are encouraging their domestic
air carriers by means of air-mail contracts and
other forms of direct or indirect subsidy.
Modern airports and other operational fa-
cilities in-many instances are being developed
at government expense. Private flying is also
promoted through government support of aero
clubs. These programs are already being
limited, however, by a growing shortage of
public funds in some Latin American coun-
tries and by the increasing cost of all phases of
civil aviation. Asa result, these countries will
probably be unable for some time to initiate
over-all development programs, and construc-
tion or improvement of facilities may be re-
stricted to the most essential Pprojects:’ Never-
theless, the announced plans of various Latin
American airlines indicate that there will con-
tinue to be some expansion of both domestic
and international air routes and frequencies.
Latin American governments will continue to
seek US advice and assistance in technicai
training of Latin American airline personnel
until national capabilities have been further
developed.

Protection of International Carriers. In
addition to the foregoing Positive support of
both domestic and international airlines, a
number of Latin American countries have
adopted policies designed to protect their na-
tional-flag carriers, operating internationally,
from intensive foreign competition. Attempts
have been made during negotiations for air
transport agreements with other countries
to neutralize the competitive advantage of
heavily-subsidized foreign airlines by restrict-
ing their traffic privileges in Latin America
(see below, “Policy Toward International Ar-
rangements”).

Policy Toward International Arrangements.

Multilateral Air Transport Agreements.
Having generally similar aviation interests,
the Latin American countries represented at
multilateral air transport conferences have
voted practically asa bloc. Because they lack
the financial and technical resources to meet
intensive competition for a limited amount
of international air traffic, these countries
have opposed multilateral agreements on in-

sagen
Page-15
14

ternational air traffic rights which included
Fifth Freedom privileges, and have insisted on
retaining discretionary powers in such
matters. For example, this attitude on the
part of Latin American countries was partially
responsible for the failure in 1947 of a special
International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) Commission convened for the purpose
of negotiating such an agreement. There ap-
pears to be little likelihood, moreover, that
this attitude will undergo a change in the
foreséeable future.

Bilateral Air Transport Agreements. In
contrast to their opposition to multilateral
agreements of a liberal type, Latin American
countries have concluded forty-three bilateral
air agreements which, for the most part, con-
form to the basic principles of the Bermuda
pact. (See Table C.) The substantial post-
war expansion of both Latin American-flag
international operations and foreign-flag serv-
ices to Latin America necessitated the con-
clusion of thirty-five agreements involving
non-Latin American countries, principally the
US and UK. The other eight agreements gov-
ern civil air relations within the Latin Ameri-
can area.

Two leading Latin American civil air powers,
Mexico and Argentina, have consistently at-
tempted to protect their international carriers
by pursuing policies designed to restrict for-
eign-flag operations in their territories, either
through limitation of flight frequencies or a
predetermined division of traffic. Mexico,
whose international airlines are at present in
the early stages of development, has success-
fully maintained its restrictive policy with the
result that it has concluded only two bilateral
air agreements. Argentina, on the other
hand, with numerous foreign routes and plans
for further expansion, has been forced in sev-
eral cases to accede to more liberal principles
demanded by other countries in order to ob-
tain desired foreign landing rights for its own
international airline.

In contrast to Argentina and Mexico, Brazil,
whose principal international carrier is well
able to compete with foreign airlines, has not
pursued a restrictive air policy, but has signed
eleven bilateral agreements of a liberal type
While Colombia and Venezuela, whose flag air-

Ss

sagher

lines operate less extensive international
routes, have not yet attempted any major
restriction of foreign airlines, there are indica-
tions that they may wish to do so if they be-
come convinced that the ability of their air-
lines to compete successfully on international
air routes is threatened by strong foreign com-
petition. The remaining Latin American
countries are not yet conducting significant
international air operations and therefore
have had little reason thus far to adopt pro-
tectionist measures for their national-flag en-
terprises. The already demonstrated opposi-
tion of these countries to a multilateral ex-
change of Fifth Freedom privileges, however,
indicates the strong possibility that their rela-
tive financial and technical weakness in civil
aviation will cause them to attempt some limi-
tation of foreign competition when they are
in a position to initiate their own international
services. On the other hand, these countries
may eventually find it necessary to follow the
example of Argentina in order to obtain mini-
mum desired rights in other countries for their
own air carriers.

The US and UK, the two principal pro-
ponents of the Bermuda principles, have been
particularly successful in promoting Bermuda-
type air agreements in Latin America. The
US has concluded eleven such agreements
throughout the area, including all the larger
countries except Mexico. The UK, for its
part, has negotiated six Bermuda-type agree-
ments in Latin America, in addition to a re-
strictive agreement signed with Argentina
prior to the Bermuda pact.

International Organizations. The Fifteen
Latin American members of the International
Civil Aviation Organization participate in its
proceedings as actively as their financial and
technical resources permit. Four of these
members, however, were censured during 1949
for failure to meet their financial obligations
to the organization. Financial difficulties
have been largely responsible for failure of
the other five Latin American countries to join
the organization.

Nine international airlines of seven Latin
American countries are active members of the
international carriers’ organization, the Inter-
national Air Transport Association.

  

RET
Page-16
SE ET 15

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

Papin A
EQUIPMENT OF LATIN AMERICAN SCHEDULED AIRLINES

_ I 1940 +f 1947 I 1949
(1) Total airerafti.. 2.0... tees aan : 203 622 oor
(2) US Manufacture:

No. of aircraft... 127 535 604

Percent of total 62 86 88
(3) UK Manufacture:

No. of aircraft : } Included in Ttem 39 58

Percent of total... (5) for 1940 6 8
(4) Axis Manufacture*:

No. of aireraft. . 40) Included in Item (5) Included in Item (5)

“Percent of total. 20f for 1947 for 1949
(5) Other Manufacture:

No. of aireraft.... 38 48 29

Percent of total. 18 8 4
(6) 4 Engine aireraft 2 38 60
(7) 3 Engine aircraft. Tete lhe! 69 19 re
(8) 2 Engine aircraft. tothe deeehe ata 96 454 528,
(9) Engine and unidentified a/c. 38 Wt 92

23 296 456

 

(10) Modern US aircraft**

 

* Item (4), showing aireraft of German or Italian manufacture, is included to demonstrate Axis influence in prewar
Latin American civil aviation. For the postwar years, 1947 and 1949, the relatively small number of these aircraft remain-
ing in service is included under “other” in Ttem (5).

** Ttem (10) includes aircraft of US manufacture which are at least as modern and as large as the DC-3, and are
currently in use by US civil and military air carriers. Specifically: DC-3, DC-4, DC-6, C-46, Convair 240, Martin
202, Constellation.

 

 

 

 

 

Taste B
COMPARATIVE WEEKLY SCHEDULED MILEAGE OF AIRLINES
I 1940 I 1947 { 1949
Latin American Airlines, Total................ ee 323, 602 1, 381, 279 1, 650, 827
US Airlines in Latin America. ............. wee eer 827, 796 843, 097
US. Airlines, Total ....0. 0... 7, 607, 000 8, 489, 000
World Airlines, Total (exeluding USSR)... : al 12, 424, 000 15, 066, 000
Page-17
16

snopaaig ‘yuMUIOG] ‘A BAON yy

“suorstaodd danatiysos aos myeyu0D 0} suvodde nq ywsoreTIG adca-wpnusag B [ISAS SI ‘GEGT JOGUIBAON gz pauls quawaarse uysdg-ewg OL +

doquawW OVOI—A
aaog-<uduiog—N
addy, usouyug—F
sor /ayyeat, wids—,)
{L epnuaag—4
IBMT —V

 

 

 

 

 

a

a

lol
cs

aL

via

tl

fl

fl

 

 

 

 

* ‘S81npuoH,

 

ne

 

Typeuayens)

 

JOPBAIVS TA

 

pl>[>l>

 

ayjqndayy weawog

 

eqns)

 

 

BY BISOD

 

 

>

 

ot

>

 

JOpenoy
BIG UIO[O)

 

aD

 

 

 

 

 

AVANT

NO.

C
°

oO

Alalaial<|mimjaimia

D> [>> p>

Bu womay

 

NV IESZLIMS:

Nivas

‘voadatod

waipisa

 

 

AN

sanviuaHe

SONVHA

 

VNoravoIN

 

 

ILIVH

 

NYOINIIOG

orig adaa

va

Yoru ¥LS09

oorxa

 

VISAZANAA

AvaoaAyA

auga
AVADVUVE

woavaoa

VIaKoT0.

UZvUa,

vIartoa

 

VNILNaDUY

OVOI

San AOD
NVORGMY NMLVT Ag agaN19NOO
SUNGNASUOV UIV “IWNOLLYNUSLNT

 

O suv,
Page-18
COUNTRY

Argentina:
Aeroposta.

Bolivia:
LAB.

Brazil:
Aero Geral. .
Aerovias Brasi

LAP...
LATB.

 

British Guiana:
BGA....

Chile:
LAN...
Lipa-Sur

Colombia:
AVIANCA.
LANSA...
SAETA.....
AEROTAXI
AFRYPESCA.

Ecuador:
ATECA........
TRASANDINA

Paraguay:

LATN.

Peru:
ANDES.

Faucett............2..

TAM.........
Uruguay:

CAUSA..

PLUNA.

Venezuela:
AVENSA......

 

TACA de VENEZUELA,

LAV.

  

 

 

   
   

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

seqfar

Tans D

 

17

OWNERSHIP OF AIRLINES

South America

PERCENTAGE OF OWNERSHIP
US. _| Nationals] Govt.

   

  

100
100
100
100
100
20* 25 55,
eeeeeee 100 seteeee
9* 91 ae
100
100
52
100
100
100
100
100
100* saeeeee

 

    

100
100
se eee ee cee ee 100
*
25* a
Seeeeee care ee 100
WO ee,
— 100
37. 05* 55. 45, 7. 5¥*
45* 42.8 12. 2**
parece bee eee 100

REMARKS

 

*Panagra

    

*9% US. interest held by TWA.
** VASP bought 82% interest in 2/49, resold
in 2/50.

 
 

*PAA

*

 

ovt. of Rio Grande do Sul holds 21%

 
 

* Govt. of city and state of Sao Paulo holds
15%

*US. citizen

 

4 other, * PAA
5 foreign

* 30% held by AVIANCA
* 100% held by AVIANCA
Unknown

 

* No information on percentages. Peruvians
believed to hold controlling interest. Some
US capital.

*PAA

 

*PAA ** LAV
*TACA system controlled by Waterman
Steamship Corp. of the US, *LAV
Page-19
18 SEQRET
Tare E
OWNERSHIP OF AIRLINES
Middle America
PERCENTAGE OF OWNERSHIP
country |-“FS [Nationals] Gores REMARKS
Bahamas:
BAL. 100* * British - wholly-owned subsidiary of BOAC.
Costa Rica:
LACSA. 40* 40 20 *PAA
Occidentales -  100F ee * US Citizen
TACA de CR.......eeee eee @ 100* *Sold by TACA System to 2 residents of
Costa Rica 5/48. Costa Rican owners may
be backed by US capital.
Cuba:
Aerovias “Q) 100 sleet eateeebeet ett,
Cubana. . 52 AA
Expreso*. 60. 46 * US Citizen
Acropostal 100 7
Aerovias de America. 100
Dominican Republ:
CDA...... 40* 60 *PAA
El Salvador:
TACA El Salvador..........0++ 98* * Almost wholly owned by TACA Airways,
$.A., in turn controlled by Waterman
Steamship Corp. of the US
Guatemala:
Aviatece.......0ccceeee cesses 0 eeeeee crete 100
Haiti:
Garde @Haiti...........6602088 eeeee nee 100
Honduras:
SAHSA......-..-. 40* 40 20 *PAA
TACA de Honduras. @ 100 *Sold by TACA System to 2 residents of
Honduras 2/48. Honduran owners may be
backed 73% by US capital.
Jamaica:
BCA... .cceccececeeeeeeeeeees tenses nteee 100* — * Purchased by BOAC from Jamaican owners
in October 1949.
Osea etre eee 100* * British citizen
Mexico:
Aeronaves..... 40* 60 *PAA
Aerovias Guest 37* 63 * US Citizen
ALASA....... * 100 * Controlling interest believed to be held by
US Citizens
ATSA. 38* 62 *2. US Citizens. -
CMA.. 41* 59 *PAA,
Contreras. 100 a
GPA 100
Jalisco. 100 . :
LAMSA......ccccceceeeeeeees WOOK eae * United Air Lines and US citizens. Pre-
ferred Stock: 100% UAL; Common Stock:
83.2% UAL, 16.8% US Citizens.
Panini. 100
Reforma. 100
TAMSA. 100
TAT... 100
Nicaragu
Ni 40* 40 20. *PAA
33* 67 *PAA
.Caribbean-Atlantic..........4+ 100* wee * US Citizens
Trinidad:
BWIA... cc eeeeceeeeeeeeeeeee 100* * British—wholly-owned subsidiary of BOAC
Page-20
SE

ET

APPENDIX A

ARGENTINA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Governmental jurisdiction over the various
phases of civil aviation in Argentina is divided
between the Ministry of Transport and the
Ministry of Air. Following the creation of the
Ministry of Transport in June 1948, the Direc-
torate of Commercial Aviation was separated
from the Ministry of Air and transferred to the
new organization. With the exception of
regulation of commercial aviation, however,
all Argentine aviation activities fall under the
jurisdiction of the Ministry of Air. The two
Ministries have the following general respon-
sibilities:

Ministry of Trans- Ministry of Air

port
Railroads National Meteorological
Service
Inland River Institute of Aeronautical
Shipping Medicine
Overseas Ship- Airport Construction and
ping Maintenance *
Roads Air Traffic Control
Commercial Avia- Accident Investigation
tion (other than commer-
cial)
Aircraft Industry (Cor-
doba)
Air Force

When the Argentine airlines were national-
ized in May 1949, they were placed under the
direction of the Ministry of Transport. Re-
sentment of the Ministry of Air over the
changes which reduced its power and rivalry
between the two Ministries in the field of
transportation have adversely affected the
Argentine Government’s administration of
aviation matters. Military officers hold the
majority of key posts in both Ministries and

 

* The new international airport at Ezezia has been
placed under the Ministry of Transport.

thus exercise almost complete control over
civil aviation policy.

Among the several temporary or permanent
commissions which have been established to
deal with civil aviation are: (1) an advisory
council whose responsibility is to coordinate
the activities of all government organizations
on matters affecting international civil avia-
tion, with particular reference to Argentina's
membership in the International Civil Avia-
tion Organization (ICAO), and to advise the
Minister of Air thereon; and (2) a temporary
Air Transport Advisory Council which is to
study the position of commercial aviation in
Argentina in relation to the over-all transport
requirements of the country.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

Argentina’s desire to bring its aviation up
to the level of the most advanced air nations
of the world has produced a nationalistic air
policy designed to promote Argentine civil
aviation and to develop a self-sufficient in-
dustry capable of serving the needs of both
military and civil aviation in Argentina.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The Basic Air Policy of the Argentine Gov-
ernment was outlined in Decree No. 9358/45
of 27 April 1945, which stated the following
principles: ,

(1) Domestic airline ‘operations should be
undertaken preferably by the govern-
ment directly and otherwise by mixed
companies which include substantial
government participation.

(2) International aviation should be gov-

erned by bilateral reciprocity.

Infrastructure (airports and all other

ground facilities) should belong exclu-

sively to the government.

(4) Eventually, all shareholders and em-
ployees of Argentine airlines should be
native Argentines.

(3.

SEZRET 19
Page-21
20 suffers

By-laws of this decree outlined details of
organization of the mixed companies which
operated Argentina’s air services until nation-
alization of all airlines in May 1949, well ahead
of the generally anticipated schedule.

Early in 1949, a commission composed of
representatives of the various government de-
partments concerned was charged with draw-
ing up a draft Civil Aviation Code, as well as
regulations to govern civil air affairs. Until
this project can be concluded and officially
approved, however, aviation matters will con-
tinue to be administered by directive and
decree. Government action taken to date in-
cludes reclassification of Argentine airports
to conform with ICAO recommendations, es-
tablishment of a new scale of landing charges,
and issuance by decree of aircraft registra-
tion regulations.

b. Regulation of Argentine Airlines.

In accordance with the first item of the
Basic Air Policy, four mixed airline companies
were decreed early in 1946. FAMA (30 per-
cent government-owned) operated only inter-
national services, while Aeroposta, ALFA, and
ZONDA (each 20 percent government-owned)
provided primarily domestic service. Gov-
ernment control over management and oper-
ations was so rigid, however, that the private
interests were unable to exercise effectively
their prerogatives, with the result that these
companies never actually operated as mixed
companies. On the pretext that this form of
organization was uneconomic and had caused
severe financial losses (covered by govern-
ment subsidy), nationalization of the mixed
companies was decreed in May 1949. All pri-
vate shares were paid off and operational re-
organization designed to bring about the de-
sired economies was announced in October
1949. (See Section 4, Airlines.) There has
been no foreign capital participation in Ar-
gentine airlines since the end of the war.

Non-scheduled operators are definitely dis-
couraged and permits are issued only when the
services to be performed are of such a nature
that they cannot be conducted by the sched-
uled carriers.

Direct government control over airline oper-
ations has effectively prevented competition
within the country. Prior to nationalization

and reorganization of the Argentine airline
network, competition was avoided by limit-
ing the number of air transport companies and
fixing the areas within which each was to
operate. Each of the three domestic airlines
was assigned to a specific region. Although
this policy avoided competition, it also pre-
vented realization of a unified national air
network. Reorganization measures, however,
have combined the three former domestic air-
lines into a single carrier providing improved
service.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Argentina terminated all cabotage rights
for foreign airlines on 2 January 1947. The
rights now enjoyed in Argentina by foreign
airlines are determined on the basis of formal
bilateral air agreements. The “regional (in-
ternational) cabotage” policy of Argentina is
discussed below in Section 3 under the head-
ing “International Civil Aviation Policy.”

d. Promotion of Other Civil Aviation Ac-
tivity.

In compliance with the Basic Air Policy, all
airports and air navigational facilities in Ar-
gentina have become the property of the gov-
ernment and are controlled by the Ministry
of Air. This also applies to meteorological
stations and aerial cartographic offices. Un-
der the Argentine Government's five-year plan
of 1947, the State has undertaken an extensive
airport building and development program.

Aero club training and flying is facilitated
by substantial government subsidy and tech-
nical aid. The State, however, retains strict
and complete control over these operations,
which are designed to fit into the pattern of
military training. All other aeronautical
training is under direct military supervision.

While Argentine aviation policy theoreti-
cally encourages private investors to partici-
pate in the aircraft manufacturing industry,
virtually all of this function is actually per-
formed by the State. Argentina’s announced
objective is to build a self-sufficient aircraft
manufacturing industry by 1951. It will be
many years, however, before Argentina can
approach this goal. In the meantime, all
transport aircraft must be purchased abroad.

7
Page-22
suger 21

A lack of modern machine tools, technical |

and scientific knowledge, and skilled labor has
impeded Argentine aircraft manufacturing
efforts to date. The principal emphasis of the
research and construction program has been
placed on military aircraft development, which
absorbs the major portion of the limited avail-
able resources. A number of aviation scien-
tists from several European countries, for ex-
ample, are working almost exclusively on mili-
tary aircraft projects. Moreover, the Argen-
tine Government has made poor use of the
many skilled Italian workers who have re-
cently immigrated.

While many Argentine industrial plants con-
tribute indirectly to aircraft manufacture,
only three or four are engaged in the final
production of aircraft. Of these, only two are
private organizations and their limited output
is devoted to small aircraft. These concerns
are: Petrolini Hermanes, S.A., which has built
a number of 150-hp. tandem trainers, and
IMPA (Industria Metalurgica Plastica Argen-
tina), which is at present doing assembly work
and manufacture of small parts. A twin-
engine five-passenger transport is reportedly
under construction by the latter. Argentina’s
productive capacity, therefore, is centered al-
most entirely in the projects of the Aerotech-
nical Institute at Cordoba. This government-
operated enterprise was originally established
principally for research and development, but
the lack of government encouragement and
assistance to private concerns has resulted in
Cordoba’s assumption of virtually the entire
construction burden. Its projects are now al-
most exclusively military, although its future
program includes construction of a twin-
engine ten-passenger transport and a proto-
type four-engine transport. Argentina, how-
ever, does not yet possess adequate equipment
to make the necessary high-stress material and
structural tests for the production of trans-
port aircraft comparable to those now being
produced by the US and UK. Although Cor-
doba has been represented by the Argentine
Government as the nucleus of a great national
aircraft industry, it is possible that its prin-
cipal mission for some time to come will ac-
tually be to develop the technical knowledge

required in Argentina for the effective pur-
chase of foreign aircraft.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

In order to minimize foreign competition
with its international carrier, FAMA, Argen-
tina has not only consistently resisted grant-
ing Fifth Freedom traffic rights, but has also
attempted to protect FAMA by seeking air
agreements on the basis of a predetermined
division of traffic. Some Argentine agree-
ments have gained advantages for its carrier
in this respect, but, in general, Argentina has
been forced to accede to more liberal agree-
ments granting full traffic rights in order to
secure satisfactory reciprocal rights.

Under its “regional (or international) cabo-
tage” theory (decreed 12 September 1947, al-
though pronounced and promoted earlier),
Argentina attempted to create and become the
leader of a regional bloc including Chile, Uru-
guay, Paraguay, Peru, and Bolivia, in which
all mail and passenger traffic between points
within the region would be reserved to airlines
of the countries comprising the bloc. How-
ever, Argentine efforts to create such a restric-
tive bloc within the neighboring area -were
effectively frustrated by the defection of Chile,
which concluded a full Five Freedoms agree-
ment with the US in May 1947, and failed to
support Argentine attempts to secure inter-
national recognition of the regional bloc. Ar-
gentina itself was forced to modify its position
in negotiations with the US and also concluded
a Fifth Freedom: agreement in May 1947.
This agreement, however, has never been fully
effective as a result of Argentine intransigence
with respect to conclusion of the requisite
route annex to the agreement. In view of
FAMA’s present requirement for US landing
rights, Argentine obstructionism may soon be
withdrawn.

Argentina has concluded restrictive type bi-
lateral agreements with the UK (May 1946),
Portugal and Spain. Although the agree-
ments with France and Italy may also be sus-
ceptible of restrictive interpretation, other Ar-
gentine agreements, including those with the
Netherlands and the Scandinavian countries,
are of a liberal nature generally similar to that

segs
Page-23
22 suofer

concluded with the US. (See attached chart
on Latin American bilateral air agreements.)

b. International Organizations.

Argentina was the only Latin American
country not invited to the 1944 Chicago Con-
ference at which the Convention establishing
ICAO was adopted. Since it adhered to the
Convention on 4 June 1946, however, Argen-
tina has participated actively in ICAO. Ar-
gentina’s international airline, FAMA, is an
active member of the International Air Trans-
port Association (IATA).

c. US Technical Assistance,

Beéause of its Axis-oriented policy during
World War II, Argentina did not benefit from
the US-sponsored Inter-American aviation
training and technical assistance programs.
Moreover, it has not taken advantage of the
opportunity to request US air or technical
missions during the postwar period.

4. Airlines.

a. Argentine Scheduled Airlines.

Before 1945, the airlines of Argentina were
wholly privately owned. The Argentine Air
Policy Law of 1945, however, made govern-
ment participation in the airlines compulsory.
Under this and subsequent decrees, three do-
mestic carriers and one international airline
were established. Until nationalization of
these airlines in May 1949, the government
held 20 percent of the capital of the domestic
mixed companies, Aeroposta, ALFA, and
ZONDA, and 30 percent of the capital of
FAMA, the international “chosen instru-
ment.” The Dodero shipping and trading in-
terests held a large part of the private stock of
these companies.

Nationalization of the mixed companies, in-
volving sale of all private shares to the gov-
ernment was decreed in May 1949, ostensibly
because the mixed-company form of organiza-
tion was uneconomic and resulted in severe
financial losses which the state had to assume.

In order further to reduce administrative
costs and improve services, the Argentine
Government in November 1949 initiated an
extensive reorganization of the nationalized
airlines. All four carriers were merged into

a single state entity known as Aerolineas Ar-
gentinas. FAMA continues to be the instru-
ment for transoceanic and major international
operations, while domestic and regional in-
ternational services are conducted under the
name of Aeroposta. ALFA and ZONDA have
ceased to exist. Until the necessary changes
in power plants, panel instrumentation, and
radio equipment can be effected to make the
equipment of the three former airlines inter-
changeable, operations will continue very
much as in the past although functioning un-
der a single administration and management.

The military air transport line, LADE, has
been maintained for pioneering new routes, for
relieving the load on internal routes at peak
traffic periods, and for operation of “national
interest” services of little commercial interest
to the regular airlines.

Dollar exchange difficulties have seriously
hampered Argentine efforts to acquire and
maintain new US equipment. Utilization of
FAMA’s DC-6 aircraft has been severely re-
stricted by lack of spare parts. An Argentine
order for five Convair 240 aircraft, moreover,
has been subject to extended negotiations and
has not yet been fulfilled because of lack of
dollar exchange.

(1) Aeroposta (Empresa Aerocomercial del
Estado Aeroposta).

Routes: Aeroposta serves the southern por-
tion of Argentina, below an arbitrary line ex-
tending from Buenos Aires in a generally
southwest direction to the Chilean bound-
ary. This area includes the agricultural and
sheep-raising areas, as well as the Argentine
lake region.

Equipment:

6 DC-3
2 C-47
5 JU-52/3 m

Ownership: Government. Formerly a mixed
company, re-organized in 1947 from an earlier
privately-owned Aeroposta.

(2) ALFA (Empresa Aerocomercial del Es-
tado ALFA).

Routes: ALFA serves the northeastern part
of Argentina, with Buenos Aires as the south-
ern terminus. International routes are oper-
ated to Asuncion and Montevideo.

segrer
Page-24
s affe ET 23
AIRLINES OF ARGENTINA
( October, 1949)
. Number
Airline Unduplicated _ Scheduled of Aircraft Ownership
Route Miles* |Miles per Week| (Various Types)
AEROPOSTA 4,089 36,862 13 100% Govt.
ALFA 2,976 18,658 26 100% Govt.
ZONDA 2,185 37,868 17 100% Govt.
LADE 1,886 12,812 21 100% Govt.
FAMA 9.166 44,876 20 100% Govt.
TOTAL 20,302 151,040 i 97
* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which
are not duplicated by an individual airline. ORE Tr-350

Equipment:

5 DC-3 .

2 Beechcraft C-45

6 Cessna C-78

2 Stinson Voyager

1 Grumman Goose

6 Noorduyn Norseman
4 Short Sandringham

Ownership: Government. Formerly a mixed
company, reorganized in 1946 from the pri-
vate “Corporacion.”

(3) ZONDA (Empresa Aerocomercial del
Estado ZONDA).

Routes: ZONDA serves the densely popu-
lated agricultural region of central Argentina
with three routes, and the sparsely populated
northwestern region with one route. ZONDA
has taken over the cabotage services formerly
provided by the US airline PANAGRA, on two
routes: Buenos Aires-Cordoba-Mendoza; and
Buenos Aires-Cordoba-Tucuman-Salta.

An international route is also operated, as
an extension of the Buenos Aires-Mendoza
route, to Santiago, Chile. With this route,
ZONDA supplements FAMA's Buenos Aires,
Santiago nonstop service by providing inter-
national service to the intermediate cities.

Equipment:

16 DC-3
1 Avro Anson

Ownership: Government. Formerly a mixed
company set up in February 1946.

(4) LADE (Lineas Aereas del Estado)

Routes: LADE was established to operate
feeder routes throughout Argentina, supple-
menting the trunk routes of Aeroposta,
ALFA, and ZONDA. Operations are at pres-
ent confined to the central part of the country,
which includes the entire pampas agricultural
region, except for one route extending into the
foothills of the Andes at Bariloche and San
Juan.

Equipment: (Not included in the summary
table of Latin American airline equipment,
since LADE is operated by the Argentine Air
Force and uses some Air Force transport
planes.)

1 DC-3°

1 Lockheed Electra
15 JU-52:°3m

2 Dewoitine 338

2 Dewoitine 333

Ownership: Government. Preceded by an-
other airline of the same name, also operated
by the Air Force. The routes of the old LADE
have been taken over by other airlines, and
the present LADE has established new routes.

(5) FAMA (Empresa Aerocomercial del Es-
tado FAMA).

Routes: As Argentina's designated “chosen
instrument,” FAMA has the right to operate

segfer
Page-25
24 : sect

all international routes. It operates all the
long distance international services, but sev-
eral routes to neighboring countries have been
allocated to the “domestic” airlines.

FAMA’s intercontinental routes connect
Buenos Aires with the capitals of Spain, Italy,
France, and the UK. These connections are
made over two routes, both having a segment
in common as far as Madrid (Buenos Aires-Rio
de Janeiro-Natal-Dakar-Villa Cisneros-Mad-
rid).- At Madrid the routes branch, one con-
tinuing to Paris and London, the other to
Rome. It is planned to extend the latter
route to the Near East. FAMA has an appli-
cation pending before the US Civil Aeronautics
Board for a route from Buenos Aires to New
York via Sao Paulo or Rio de Janeiro, Belem,
Port of Spain, and Habana. Continental
routes operated by FAMA are: Buenos Aires-
Santiago, Chile, and Buenos Aires-Porto
Alegre-Sao Paulo-Rio de Janeiro.

Equipment:
6 DC-6
6 DC-4
5 Vickers Viking
2 Avro York
1 Lancastrian

Ownership: Government. Formerly a mixed
company set up in February 1946. FAMA is

a member of the International Air Transport
Association.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Argentina is served by two US companies,
Pan American World Airways (via the east
coast of South America) and PANAGRA (via
the west coast). Moreover, a third US airline,
Braniff International Airways, hopes to extend
its Latin American service to Buenos Aires,
via Asuncion, in the near future.* The fol-
lowing other foreign operators also serve Ar-
gentina:

European:
BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corpo-
ration) (via both coasts)
Air France
KLM (Royal Dutch Airlines)
SAS (Scandinavian Airways System)
ALITALIA (Italy)
IBERIA (Spain)

Latin America:
Cruzeiro do Sul (Brazil)
Panair do Brasil
CAUSA (Uruguay)
LAN (Chile)

 

* Braniff service over this route began during June
1950.

snofer
Page-26
sefer

APPENDIX B

BOLIVIA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion,

Civil aviation in Bolivia is the responsibility
of a Director General of Civil and Commercial
Aeronautics acting under the jurisdiction of
the Minister of Public Works and Communi-
cation. A Special Aeronautics Commission,
headed by the Foreign Minister and including
other present and past members of the gov-
ernment, was appointed in May 1948, to study
the aviation scene in Bolivia. Its report was
submitted in April 1949, but has not yet been
approved by the Cabinet. With respect to
administration of Bolivian civil aviation, the
report recommends creation of a government-
controlled airport administration authority,
which would gradually assume control of all
Bolivian airports, and establishment of a na-
tional council of aviation similar to the US
Civil Aeronautics Board.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

The report of the Special Aeronautics Com-
mission represents the thinking of officials
whose opinions carry considerable weight with
respect to air matters and hence is a fairly
accurate guide to Bolivian air policy. In ad-
dition to its recommendations concerning ad-
ministration, the Commission also recom-
mended that the surplus transport aircraft of
the military Air Transport Squadron (ETA),
which has flown some routes commercially,
should be transferred either to the principal
established airline, Lloyd Aero Boliviano
(LAB), or to a new government-controlled
commercial company. The Commission indi-
cated, however, that it preferred creation of a
new Bolivian airline, which would not com-
pete with LAB over the same routes. The
services now operated within the country by
the US carrier, PANAGRA, would not be ad-
versely affected. The report comments cau-
tiously that cabotage, in principle, should be

reserved for domestic companies, but that cir-
cumstances may make it desirable to depart
from this principle; therefore no rigidly na-
tionalistic policy should be adopted. Subsi-
dization is endorsed as an essential means of
shaping the development of the industry and
of giving it the financial support necessary to
assure a reasonable profit. Competition, the
report points out, is desirable but must be
carefully controlled in the interest-of both the
public and the aviation industry.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The administration and regulation of avia-
tion in Bolivia was organized under the basic
law of 25 October 1947, which transferred con-
trol over Bolivian civil aviation from military
to civil authorities, and established the Direc-
torate General of Civil and Commercial Avia-
tion. A Decree of 20 May 1948 and a Supreme
Resolution of 7 August 1948 supplemented this ©
law. New aviation regulations prepared by
the Directorate have not yet been approved.
Government relations with the domestic and
international airlines are established on a con-
tract basis.

b. Regulation of Bolivian Airlines.

Bolivian policy favors government partici-
pation in airline companies, as reflected by the
above-mentioned report and by the govern-
ment’s present ownership of a 55 percent in-
terest in LAB. Subsidization of airlines (LAB
and PANAGRA), air facilities and aero clubs
has been practiced in the past and appears to
be an accepted policy. Nationalization of
Bolivian airlines is recognized as being beyond
Bolivia’s financial means, however, and prob-
ably would not be attempted except in an
emergency. Controlled competition is favored
at present, although LAB enjoyed a monopoly
of domestic air services (PANAGRA cabotage
services excepted) until flight authorization
was granted the Bolivian Development Cor-
poration in September 1947,

suffer 25
Page-27
26 suger

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Bolivia and Ecuador are the only Latin
American countries which still permit foreign
airlines to operate cabotage services. The US
airline, PANAGRA, serves some eight towns
within Bolivia in addition to its international
route through Bolivia, which stops only at La
Paz. This privilege is interpreted by Bolivia
as a temporary concession, until such time as
the domestic airlines are in a position to ex-
tend their services sufficiently to replace the
foreign cabotage services.

d. Promotion of Other Civil Aviation
Activity.

By the same law (25 October 1947) which
created the Directorate General of Civil and
Commercial Aviation, the executive branch
of the Bolivian Government was authorized
to proceed with the expropriation of air strips
built within the country by private enterprise.
The expropriated fields belong to the State,
which has authorized LAB and PANAGRA to
build facilities and administer the airports un-
der contract, including some subsidy. Accord-
ing to LAB’s present contract with the gov-
ernment, its twenty airfields will pass to the
operational control of the State on 31 Decem-
ber 1951, with no compensation for the invest-
ments made. PANAGRA will be compensated
for the investments it has made, whether its
facilities are taken over before or upon expira-
tion of its present contract (which runs to 1
April 1967).

There is no airframe or engine industry in
Bolivia.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Because of Bolivia’s landlocked position,
civil aviation is of key importance to the coun-
try. Bolivian policy with respect to interna-
tional aviation has favored almost complete
freedom of the air. The two bilateral air
agreements concluded by Bolivia have been
with Chile and the US and are both Fifth
Freedom agreements.

b. International Organizations.

Bolivia is a member of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), but has
lacked the funds to send a delegation to most
ICAO meetings. Furthermore, it was among

SEE

four Latin American members whose voting
power was suspended by the 1949 ICAO Assem-
bly for failure to meet their financial obliga-
tions.

c. US Technical Assistance.

A CAA technical assistance mission has been
assigned to Bolivia since early in 1948.

4. Airlines.

Domestic services in Bolivia are provided by
LAB, PANAGRA, ETA, and the Air Transport
Company of the Bolivian Development Corpo-
ration.

LAB was organized in 1925 and operated
under German influence until 1941, when the
Bolivian Government acquired 48 percent of
the stock. The company was operated under
contract until 1946 by PANAGRA, which put
LAB operations on an efficient, safe basis.
Upon termination of this contract, the com-
pany was partially reorganized and the gov-
ernment assumed a controlling interest of the
stock.

ETA has been ambitious to use its eight
DC-3’s in expanded commercial operations
within Bolivia. The Bolivian Development
Corporation service, which uses two C-46 cargo
planes, is a minor operation almost entirely
limited to the. La Paz-Reyes route. If ac-
cepted, the Special Aeronautics Commission's
recommendation that the equipment of both
ETA and the Development Corporation be
transferred to LAB or to a new commercial
company controlled by the government will
reduce the possibility of competition in com-
mercial air transport between the Defense
Ministry (which controls ETA) and the Min-
istry of Public Works (which controls LAB
and the aviation activities of the Development
Corporation). Establishment of a new com-
mercial air transport company, which the
Commission considered preferable, would
create indirect and controlled competition for
LAB, with both carriers under the jurisdiction
of the same government regulatory bodies.

a. Bolivian Scheduled Airlines.

(1) LAB (Lloyd Aereo Boliviano)
Unduplicated Miles Scheduled
Route Miles Per Week

4,010 15,932
Page-28
secfir 27

Routes: LAB operates only within Bolivia,
its routes extending the length of Bolivia
from north to south, and from La Paz in
the west to Santa Cruz in the east. The west-
ern part of LAB’s network serves principally
the populous “altiplano” region; the eastern
part of its network serves the lowlands from
near the Brazilian border in the north to the
Argentine border in the south.

Equipment:

7 DC-3
1 C-46

(During the recent revolt in Bolivia, 1 DC-3
was destroyed and two others were flown to
Argentina by the rebels. As of October 1949
LAB had only 4 DC-3 aircraft and 1 C-46 avail-
able for service).

Ownership:

Government—55 percent
Nationals—25 percent
US (PANAGRA)—20 percent

b. PANAGRA.

In addition to its international routes,
PANAGRA serves the eastern part of Bolivia
over two cabotage routes extending to the
Brazilian border and thence to Campo Grande,
Brazil.

5. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

The international routes of PANAGRA con-
nect Bolivia with Peru, Chile, Argentina, and
Brazil.

Early in 1949, a second US airline, Braniff
Airways, instituted its west coast service (Bal-
boa-Guayaquil-Lima-La Paz) and in March
established a non-stop Lima-Rio de Janeiro
service overflying Bolivia. Panair do Brasil,
which plans to operate a reciprocal Rio de
Janeiro-Lima service overfiying Bolivia, has
not yet begun operations over this route.

sofas
Page-29
APPENDIX C

BRAZIL

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion,

In order to fulfill the provisions of the Bra-
zilian Air Code, an Air Ministry was created on
20 January 1941 to direct all aviation activity
in Brazil, both civil and military. Control
over civil air affairs was vested in various di-
visions of the Air Ministry having the follow-
ing general functions:

(a) Directory of Civil Aeronautics—respon-
sible for all legal, technical, and administra-
tive problems except the operational control
of air traffic; inspects aviation clubs, air
schools and air transport companies, and
issues certificates and licenses on the basis of
directives from the Directory of Supply.

(b) Directory of Supply—responsible for in-
specting aircraft. This is a military office.

(c) Directory of Air Routes—responsible for
organization and operation of airports, air-
way traffic control, and communication and
meteorological services. This is primarily a
military organization.

(d) Air Staff—a policy and planning
agency, which functions only through the
Minister of Air.

(e) Five Air Zone Commanders—military
officers primarily concerned with military
matters, but exercising authority over civil air
affairs in their territories in a manner com-
parable to that of US Civil Aeronautics Ad-
ministration regional administrators.

In June 1949, an Air Route Licensing Board
was created by the Directory of Civil Aeronau-
tics for certification of domestic airline routes.
This body, similar to the US Civil Aeronautics
Board, deals with route requests, regulates
flight frequencies and traffic stops, and
handles “all other questions” of Brazilian air
transport.

International air policy is determined by a
special committee (the CERNAI), which is

dominated by the Air Ministry, although there
is token representation of the Foreign Office.

The chart on following page shows the re-
lationship between the various functional
units of the Brazilian Air Ministry.

Through its Air Ministry, Brazil has at
present probably the most extensive aviation
organization of any country in Latin America.
The Air Ministry’s primarily military charac-
ter, with military men holding the majority
of key posts, is attributable in part to its
creation on the eve of war and to the strategic
nature of the duties which were pressed upon
it during the following four years.

In a decree of 16 September 1946, President
Dutra set forth the objectives and respon-
sibilities of the Ministry:

(a) to cooperate with the other agencies
of the government in order to guarantee legal
order and to assure the national defense;

(b) to organize, equip and instruct the
Brazilian Air Force;

(c) to regulate, develop and coordinate
civil and commercial aviation;

(d) to coordinate and stimulate the aero-
nautical industries of the country.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

Brazilian air policy finds its authority in the
previously mentioned laws which created the
Air Ministry and outlined its role. These are:
(1) Decree Law No. 483 of 8 June 1938, the
Brazilian Air Code, promulgated under powers
delegated to the President of the Republic
by Article 180 of the Constitution; (2) Decree
Law No. 2961 of 20 January 1941, which
created the Air Ministry to direct all aviation
activity, both civil ard military; and (3) De-
cree Law No. 9888 of 16 September 1946, which
further defined the purposes and organization
of the Air Ministry. Other decrees and orders

  

suffer 29

Lp. # lolank
Page-30
snk T

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30
AIR MINISTRY -+-4 CERNAI
(AIR MINISTER)
Dir. of Civil Dir. of Dir, of Air
Aeronautics Supply Routes
Air Staff 5 Zone Command
Officers
Director | Air Route Licensing Board
1 I ]
Legal Traffic Operations Private Flying
Division Division Division Development Div.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

have been issued from time to time supple-
menting the foregoing legislation.

b. Regulation of Brazilian Airlines.

Brazilian national policy encourages the
private ownership of airlines and the Brazilian
Government has no financial interest in any
airline. The State of Rio Grande do Sul, how-
ever, has a 21 percent interest in VARIG, and
the State of Sao Paulo, a 75 percent share
in VASP. It is Brazilian policy, moreover, to
assure the control of domestic air transporta-
tion enterprises by nationals of Brazil.

Subsidies are granted to airlines by the
Brazilian Government solely for the develop-
ment and operation of unprofitable routes of
national interest. Past recipients of this aid
have been Cruzeiro, Panair do Brasil, VARIG,
and NAB. Since mid-1948, the Directory of
Civil Aeronautics has taken firmer action to
control competition and prevent a continu-
ation of the severe three-year rate war which
resulted from the mushrooming of many small
air transport companies after the war. (See

SECRE
.

ORE Tr-450

below, Section 4, Brazilian Scheduled Air-
lines.)

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Brazil reserves cabotage traffic for its do-
mestic airlines. Privileges for foreign carriers,
including the carriage of international traffic,
are negotiated through formal bilateral air
agreements, although direct government-com-
pany contracts are occasionally resorted to for
the use of air facilities and similar privileges.

For the most part, Brazil has pursued a re-
strictive policy with respect to foreign non-
scheduled operators, principally because of its
desire to assure maximum utilization of avail-
able scheduled airline capacity. Brazil has
been willing in principle to grant permission
for infrequent US non-scheduled commercial
flights between the US and Brazil. On the
other hand, it has generally denied flight
clearance for US non-scheduled carriers oper-
ating between Brazil and a third country, and
has resisted granting even technical stop per-
mission on Brazilian territory for flights

T
Page-31
sage 31

neither originating nor terminating in Brazil.
Recently, however, Transocean Air Lines of
the US secured permission to fly displaced
persons from Europe to Recife and Natal under
contract with IRO. (See below, Section 4 c,
Foreign Non-Scheduled Operations.)

d. Promotion of Other Civil Aviation Ac-
tivity.

With respect to civil aviation, the Brazilian
Government's over-all economy program has
cut most heavily into appropriations for air-
port development. The bulk of construction
funds now being made available is devoted
principally to maintenance and improvement
of military airfields. Therefore, the initiation
of a large-scale civil airport development pro-
gram such as Argentina has undertaken seems
rather unlikely in the near future. Even the
excellent wartime facilities in Brazil which
the Air Ministry has taken over from the US
have been poorly maintained. Brazil is limit-
ing itself to “only the indispensable” in im-
proving existing facilities.

Aero club training has been subsidized fairly
generously to encourage private flying and
thus to build up a reserve of pilots, as well as
an air-minded public. The recent economy
Program, however, has caused a reduction in
the subsidies to these clubs, and, at the same
time, a relaxation of their ties to the govern-
ment.

A government-promoted aeronautical engi-
neering school, the first of its kind in Brazil,
has been established, advised, and staffed by
US nationals. Air Force training schools,
meanwhile, continue their extensive programs.

All manufacture of aircraft in Brazil ceased
by the end of 1948. Until that time, the gov-
ernment had promoted a few small enter-
prises: (1) a small government factory at the
Galeao Airport in Rio de Janeiro, which as-
sembled trainers from parts shipped from the
US; (2) the government-owned and operated
Fabrica de Motores near Rio de Janeiro, which
assembled a few aircraft engines with parts
from the US; and (3) a privately owned, gov-
ernment-subsidized plant at Lagoa Santos
near Belo Horizonte, which had a contract to
assemble a few AT-6 trainers but has been in-
Operative since 1947 because of extended liti-
gation. Two privately owned enterprises,

moreover, turned out quite a few sport planes.
These concerns were the Cia. Aeronautica
Paulista, which produced about 30 two-place
“Paulistinha” aircraft during 1948, and the
Cia. Nacional de Navegacao Aerea, which
turned out about 100 Piper Cub types.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements,

Brazil has supported liberal air traffic prin-
ciples in most of its formal negotiations for
air agreements. In principle, it favors the
multilateral approach for the negotiation of
commercial traffic rights, reserving to bilateral
negotiations the airline routes to be operated.
Brazilian officials, moreover, have pointed out
that their country’s support for the Mexican
proposal in favor of a restrictive multilateral
air agreement at the 1947 Geneva meeting of
the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) did not represent actual Brazilian
policy.

Brazil bases its bilateral negotiations upon
the Bermuda type agreement concluded with
the US on 6 September 1946, which was the
first agreement of this type concluded by the
US with a Latin American country. Since
that time, Brazil has signed similar agree-
ments with the UK, Portugal, France, the
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Switzerland, Argentina, Chile, and Lebanon
and has nearly completed negotiations with
Spain.* Parts of the Argentine agree-
ment have been criticized, particularly in
Brazil, as being susceptible of restrictive in-
terpretation, with the result that the agree-
ment has not yet been ratified. Otherwise,
Brazil has adhered closely to Bermuda prin-
ciples. .

b. International Organizations.

Brazil has been an active member of ICAO
since its inception in 1944 and has supported
the organization as fully as Brazilian finances
have permitted. Panair do Brasil, Cruzeiro,
and VARIG are the country’s airline members

 

“The Brazil-Spain Air Transport Agreement,
signed 28 November 149, contains restrictive pro-
visions and principles not found in other Brazilian
air agreements. It is considered as representing a
change in Brazilian aviation policy in an effort fur-
ther to protect Brazilian international air services

oufirs
Page-32
32 : stofer

of the International Air Transport-Association *
(IATA).

c. US Technical Assistance.

Brazil probably benefited more than any
other Latin American country from the US
Inter-American Aviation Training Program,
the Airport Development Program, and other
wartime measures of hemisphere cooperation.
Many pilots, technicians, and administrative
personnel were trained in the US and a string
of large, modern air bases was built around
Brazil’s “bulge” under US sponsorship.

US technical cooperation with Brazil in air
affairs is accomplished at present principally
through private channels. The Aeronautical
Institute at San Jose do Campo near Sao
Paulo, for instance, has engaged a number of
US aviation technicians and professors under
private contract in order to build up a native
corps of aeronautical engineers.

4. Airlines.

a. Brazilian Scheduled Airlines.

Brazil's vast area and its lack of adequate
surface transport has made the country a fer-
tile field for the development of an extensive
and intensive air transport network. A num-
ber of circumstances, including the air-mind-
edness of recent Brazilian governments, their
relatively laissez-faire attitude toward air
transport, the availability of cheap surplus
aircraft in the US, and the technical and
financial assistance furnished by the US since
1941, have promoted the great postwar expan-
sion in Brazilian scheduled and non-scheduled
air services. As a consequence, however, an
excessive number of small companies came
into being, creating a condition of serious
competitive imbalance and leading to a violent
rate war which also threatened the excellent
safety record of Brazilian airlines. The finan-
cial condition of several companies finally be-
came so acute that the government took meas-
ures to control the competition by stricter ap-
Plication of existing regulations and institu-
tion of new ones. These steps, including more
stringent regulations on capitalization, have
forced almost a dozen marginal operators to
suspend operations temporarily or perma-
nently, leaving nine scheduled Brazilian air-

lines, eight non-scheduled, and about ten
charter or taxi services still operating in 1949.
Government operating permits were with-
drawn 6 June 1949 from ten Brazilian com-
panies which had either never commenced
operations or had ceased operating for more
than one year. Enforcement of minimum re-
quirements for maintenance and facilities has
threatened to force the remaining marginal
operators out of business. In addition, one
of the oldest scheduled operators in Brazil,
NAB, long a recipient of government subsidy
for up to 80 percent of its services, also be-
came insolvent during the latter part of 1948.
The six major scheduled airlines have also
experienced severe economic difficulties in the
postwar period, with the result that Panair
do Brasil initiated a strong economy program,
Cruzeiro was close to bankruptcy, and Aero-
vias Brasil suffered serious financial losses.
VASP, VARIG, and REAL, however, with their
more efficient and conservative managements,
were able to minimize their financial losses.
Despite the foregoing difficulties, these six air-
lines managed to retain their tight hold on
the Brazilian air traffic market, as indicated
in the following table showing the percentage
of Brazil’s total passenger and freight air
mileage being flown by each airline in 1948.

Percentage of Total Percentage of Total
Passenger-Kilometers Ton-Kilometers

 

PAB 38.2 33.06
Cruzeiro 22.1 25.20
Aerovias 12.9 18.00
VARIG 6.2 12.40
VASP 8.9 3.00
REAL 88 2.70

Total, S71 94.36

six airlines

LAP 3.20
Others 29 2.44

The outstanding recent development in
Brazilian aviaticn was the purchase of Aero-
vias Brasil by VASP in 1949, and its resale in
1950 to private Brazilian interests. This ac-
quisition placed VASP, a very wealthy enter-
prise owned and controlled almost wholly by
the city and State of Sao Paulo, temporarily
in control of the third ranking Brazilian air-
line, in terms of passenger-kilometers flown
during 1948. The present owners of Aero-
vias Brasil secured control in February 1950

sufesr

%
Page-33
SEQRET 33
.

at double the price paid by VASP a year earlier. ‘
Details of the transactions are rather obscure
but reportedly involve the political maneuver-
ings of Adhemar de Barros, Governor of Sao
Paulo, who is seeking the presidency of Brazil.
An important factor in the Brazilian air
transport picture is the air mail and military
transport service operated by the Brazilian
Air Force (FAB). This service, the Correio
Aereo Nacional (CAN) is strictly a military
airline, operated ostensibly with the aim of
training FAB pilots. Civilian passengers have
been frequently carried by CAN, however, with
the result that it has occasionally competed
with the scheduled airlines, especially with
Panair do Brasil on its service to Asuncion,
Paraguay. CAN’s operations do not repre-
sent any great.threat to the civil airlines be-
cause the latter and the democratic Brazilian
government keep CAN in line. CAN was
founded as Correio Aereo Militar by General
Eduardo Gomez in 1931, for the operation of

 

air mail routes within Brazil and to Paraguay
which were inoperative at the time, owing,
CAN’s proponents claimed, to the lack of initia-
tive of Brazilian private capital.

During 1948, CAN flew an average of 60,000
miles per week over a route network of 38,000
miles. Aircraft for these operations were
drawn from two air transport groups of the
FAB Transport Command whose equipment
includes 43 C-47’s and 2 C-46’s.

(1) Aero Geral (Aero Geral, Ltda.)

Routes: Aero Geral operates along the coast
of Brazil between Santos and Natal via Rio
de Janeiro, Vitoria, Belmonte, Salvador, Ara-
caju, Penedo, Maceio, Recife, and Cabedelo.

Equipment:

1 C-46
3 PBY-5

Ownership: 100 percent private Brazilian.
Aero Geral was established in the summer of
1947.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF BRAZIL
({ October ,1949)
7 Number
Unduplicated Scheduled i
Airline Route Miles* [Miles per Week| of Aircraft Ownership
(Various Types)

Aero Geral 1,572 3,144 4 100% Private

7 91% Private

19

Aerovias Brasil 12,226 98,597 ( 9% U.S.
LATB 1,410 5,188 10 100% Private
LAP 1,605 13,918 5 100% Private

+ 52% Private
Panair de Brasil 21,408 176,764 28 { 48% U.S.
REAL 2,519 60,856 18 100% Private
VARIG 2,680 40,403 24 100% Private
Cruzeiro 10,187 125,401 26 100% Private
SAVAG 633 4,809 2 100% Private
VASP 2,892 60,450 22 100% Private

TOTAL 73,064 589,530 158

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline,

ORE Tr-550

saofler
*
Page-34
34 suger

(2) Aerovias Brasil (Empresa de Trans-
portes Aerovias Brasil, S.A.).

Routes:

Domestic: Aerovias Brasil serves the eastern
part of Brazil with a more extensive network
in that area than any other Brazilian airline.
Its system is composed of three main route
groups: (a) routes along the Atlantic Coast
from Porto Alegre as far north as Belem; (b)
interior routes straight north from Sao Paulo
to Belem; and (c) a route extending north
from Rio de Janeiro through Belo Horizonte
to Lapa, where it branches off into two routes,
one to Parnaiba and the other to Fortaleza.

International: Aerovias Brasil’s only inter-
national route at present is to the US, via
Caracas and Ciudad Trujillo to Miami, Florida.

Equipment: 19 DC-3

Ownership:

91 percent private Brazilian
9 percent US (TWA)

Aerovias was organized in 1942 as a sub-
sidiary of the extensive TACA Airways System
(see Panama, Section 4, Airlines). TACA’s
holdings were bought by Brazilians when the
company was reorganized in- 1947. In Febru-
ary 1949, VASP acquired an 82 percent in-
terest in Aerovias Brasil, but then resold this
share early in 1950 to private Brazilian in-
terests.

(3) LATB (Linha Aerea Transcontinental
Brasileira, S.A.).

Routes: LATB operates between Rio de
Janeiro and Sao Paulo, and from Rio de
Janeiro to Recife along the Brazilian coast.

Equipment:

5 DC-3
1 Beechcraft C-45
4 Avro Anson

Ownership: Believed to be 100 percent pri-
vate Brazilian. LATB was organized in 1944.

(4) LAP (Linhas Aereas Paulistas, S.A.)

Routes: LAP operates between Rio de Ja-
neiro and Sao Paulo, and along the coast: Rio
de Janeiro-Vitoria-Caravelos-Ilheus-Salvador-
Aracaju-Maceio-Recife-Campina Grande.

Equipment:

4 DC-3
1 Lockheed Hudson

Ownership: Believed to be 100 percent pri-
vate Brazilian. LAP was organized in 1943.

(5) PAB (Panair do Brasil, S.A.).

Routes:

Domestic: The four main groups of domes-
tic routes operated by PAB are: (a) the coastal
route from Porto Alegre to Belem through
most of the larger coastal cities; (b) the
Amazon route extending from Belem the full
length of the river to Iquitos (Peru), with a
subsidiary route branching off at Manaus to
Porto Velho; (c) a route from Rio de Janeiro
north through Belo Horizonte to Belem; and
(d) the routes westward from Rio de Janeiro
to Campo Grande, Corumba and Cuiaba, and
from Rio de Janeiro through Sao Paulo, Curi-
tiba and Iguassu Falls to Asuncion (Para-
guay). PAB’s remaining domestic routes
serve the regions near Sao Paulo, Rio de Ja-
neiro and Belo Horizonte.

International: Within South America, PAB
operates international routes to Iquitos, Peru,
and to Asuncion, Paraguay, both mentioned
above, as well as a third route to Montevideo,
Uruguay, and Buenos Aires, Argentina. Out-
side South America, PAB operates a route orig-
inating in Buenos Aires with stops at Monte- _
video, Rio de Janeiro, Natal, Dakar, and Lis-
bon. From Lisbon, one branch of this route -
extends to London, via Paris, another to Istan-
bul via Madrid and Rome, and a third through
Madrid to Zurich and Stuttgart. A PAB ap-
plication is pending before the US Civil Aero-
nautics Board for a route to Miami.

Equipment:

5 Lockheed Constellation
19 DC-3
4 PBY-5

Ownership:

52 percent private Brazilian
48 percent US (PAA)

PAB has been a Pan American Airways
(PAA) subsidiary since 1930 (one year after it
was founded). PAA held all shares until 1943,
when it reduced its interest to 58 percent. In
1947, the present stock ownership ratio was
established.

(6) REAL: (Transportes Aereos Real, S.A.).

Routes: REAL operates throughout the
State of Sao Paulo and extends into the
neighboring States of Minas Gerais, Parana,
Rio Grande do Sul and the Federal District.

sefeer
Page-35
It also connects Sao Paulo with Rio de Ja-
neiro, and with many of the southern cities
as far down as Porto Alegre.

Equipment:
14 DC-3

2 Lockheed Lodestar
2 Bristol Wayfarer

Ownership: 100 percent private Brazilian.
REAL was organized in 1946.

(7) .VARIG (S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea
Rio Grandense).

Routes: VARIG operates extensive routes to
all parts of the State of Rio Grande do Sul,
connects Porto Alegre with Rio de Janeiro,
via Florianopolis, Curitiba and Sao Paulo, and
connects Porto Alegre with Montevideo over
an international route.

Equipment:
12 DC-3
7 Lockheed Electra
2 C-46
2 Junkers F-13
1 Noorduyn Norseman

Ownership: 100 percent Brazilian. The
State of Rio Grande do Sul is believed to hold
about 21 percent of the capital stock. Found-
ed in May 1927, VARIG is Brazil’s oldest for-
mally organized airline.

(8) Cruzeiro (Servicos Aereos Cruzeiro do
Sul, Ltda.).

Routes: Cruzeiro’s domestic network ex-
tends along the Brazilian coast from Belem to
Porto Alegre. From Belem, a route extends
up the Amazon to Manaus. From Rio de
Janeiro, a route extends westward through
Sao Paulo to Corumba on the Bolivian border.
Connections for points in Bolivia are made on
this route with the US carrier, PANAGRA, at
Campo Grande. From Corumba, Cruzeiro’s
route continues northward to Cuiaba, Porto
Velho, and then to Xapuri, Acre Territory.
Cruzeiro also operates an international route
from Rio de Janeiro to Buenos Aires, and
another, in conjunction with LAV, the Vene-
zuelan airline, from Rio de Janeiro to Caracas.
Change of aircraft on the latter route is made

safer 35

at Boa Vista, Brazil, near the Venezuelan
border.*
Equipment:
22 DC-3
2 DC-4
2 Focke-Wulf 200

Ownership: 100 percent private Brazilian.
Organized by German interests in 1927, Cru-
zeiro took its present name when all German
influence was eliminated in 1942.

(9) SAVAG (Sociedade Anonima Viacao
Aerea Gaucha).

Routes: SAVAG connects Porto Alegre, capi-
tal of the State of Rio Grande do Sul, with
three cities in the southern part of the State:
Bage, Pelotas, and Rio Grande. (These cities
are also served by VARIG.)

Equipment:

2 Lockheed Lodestar
(One or two DC-3 aircraft have
been lost recently in crashes.)

Ownership: 100 percent private Brazilian.
SAVAG was organized in 1946.
(10) VASP (Viacao Aerea Sao Paulo, S.A.).
Routes: VASP operates domestic routes only,
connecting the City of Sao Paulo with: (1)
Rio de Janeiro; (2) Goiania, capital of the
State of Goiaz; and (3) the southern and cen-
tral portions of the State of Sao Paulo.
Equipment:
17 DC-3
5 JU-52

Ownership: 100 percent Brazilian. The
State of Sao Paulo, the City of Sao Paulo, and
the Bank of the State of Sao Paulo together
own approximately a 75 percent controlling
interest in VASP.

b.. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Three US airlines serve Brazil on regular
international schedules: Pan American World
Airways, from the US to Belem, Rio de Ja-
neiro, Sao Paulo, and Porto Alegre (thence
to Montevideo and Buenos Aires) ; Braniff In-

 

* Cruzeiro was granted a Foreign Air Carrier per-
mit by the US CAB on 10 February 1950 authoriz-
ing it to operate service to Washington and New
York via intermediate points in Trinidad, Puerto
Rico and the Dominican Republic. This service
had not commenced by June 1950.

sugfler
Page-36
36 a suger

ternational Airways, from the US with a non-'

stop Lima-Rio de Janeiro service, inaugurated
early in 1949; and PANAGRA, from Bolivia to
Campo Grande in the west of Brazil.

European airlines and the Brazilian cities
they serve en route to Buenos Aires are:

Air France —Recife and Rio de Ja-
neiro

Alitalia (Italy) —Natal and Rio de
Janeiro

BOAC.(British Over-
seas Airways Cor-

—Natal, Rio de Janeiro
and Sao Paulo

poration)

KLM (Royal Dutch —Recife and Rio de
Airlines) Janeiro

SAS (Scandinavian —Recife and Rio de
Airway System) Janeiro

Iberia (Spain) —Natal

In addition, the Argentine-flag carrier
FAMA, stops at Rio de Janeiro and Natal en
route to Europe, and the Uruguayan airline,
PLUNA, operates between Montevideo and
Porto Alegre.

c. Foreign Non-Scheduled Operations.

Transocean Air Lines of the US has ob-
tained Brazilian permission to fly displaced
persons under contract with the International
Refugee Organization (IRO) from Europe as
far as Recife and Natal, where passengers are
transferred to Cruzeiro do Sul. (The latter
has been acting for some time as Transocean’s
agent in Brazil.) Transocean expects to make
about fifty such trips before this agreement is
terminated upon expiration of IRO in March
1950. 7

RET
Page-37
suger

APPENDIX D

CHILE

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Civil aviation in Chile is the responsibility of
a Directorate General of Aeronautics (DGA)
acting under the jurisdiction of the Minister of
National Defense. A Civil Aeronautics Board
(CAB), patterned afier that of the US, was
created during 1948. It is composed of a Di-
rector of Aeronautics, who is also chairman of
the CAB, a representative of the Foreign Of-
fice, a representative of the National Council
of Communications (in the Ministry of Public
Works and Communications), and two repre-
sentatives appointed by the President of Chile.
in addition, there is a Secretary General of the
CAB, who is also chief of the Division of Law
and Air Transport in the DGA. ‘The National
Council of Communications advises the gov-
ernment on domestic aviation policy through
an Air Transport Committee and on interna-

 

Ministry of Defense

 

 

tional aviation policy through an Air Naviga-
tion Committee. Chilean Air Force control of
the DGA and of the national airline, LAN
(Linea Aerea Nacional), is somewhat tempered
by civilian domination of the CAB and the
committee of the Communications Council.
Nevertheless, conflicts of opinion between civil
and military authorities have seriously hin-
dered the progress of civil aviation in Chile
Curing the past few years. The military, for
example, has succeeded in holding up legisla-
tion which would provide the CAB with auton-
omy and with funds to execute its functions,
including Chilean representation in interna-
tional civil aviation organizations. Chile’s air
communications system and its airports are
operated and controlled by the air force within
the DGA. The relationship between the gov-
ernment agencies concerned with civil. avia-
tion is indicated in the following chart:

 

Ministry of Public Works
and Communications

 

 

 

 

Civil Aeronautics Board

 

 

 

 

 

Under Secy. of Aviation

 

 

 

L--- ~ 7] National Council of

Communication

ch,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

suger

Chilean Directorate General Air Transport Air Navigation
Air Force of Aeronautics Committee Committee
f I I I |
frtation | | Sate | | Attwonts |] Towrist ] [Law and Air
ORE Tr- 650

37
Page-38
38 : safer

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The organic law of the Chilean Air Force
created a Directorate General of Aeronautics
to control commercial and private flying and
to enforce rules and regulations of aerial navi-
gation.

The Chilean Civil Aeronautics Board was
created by Decree No. 42 of 31 January 1948,
as a direct dependency of the Ministry of Na-
tional Defense. However, additional legisla-
tion increasing its autonomy and providing
funds for its work has been held up indefi-
nitely. A Civil Aeronautics Code for Chile was
avproved by the Chamber of Deputies in Sep-
tember 1947, but has not yet been acted upon
by the Senate. By a decree published in Jan-
uary 1948, regulations were established gov-
erning the granting of concessions and per-
mits by the CAB to commercial airlines.

b. Regulation of Chilean Airlines.

It is Chilean policy to maintain a govern-
ment-owned and financed airline as the sole
scheduled Chilean operator for routes within
Chile and to other countries. Though an in-
cependent entity, the national airline, LAN, is
owned and subsidized by the government and
effectively controlled by the air force, which
provides most of the airline’s pilots and key
officials, and which dominates the government
regulatory body, the DGA.

The establishment of additional Chilean
airlines must be approved by both the CAB
and LAN. Direct competition with LAN is
not permitted, although two small companies
have recently been authorized to establish
scheduled services supplementing LAN opera-
tions. Charter and taxi services are also of-
fered by one of these companies, and an all-
cargo service is being proposed by a third com-
pany. The law of 16 February 1949 extended
to any other commercial airline the same cus-
toms and tax exemption privileges previously
enjoyed only by LAN.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Until 1946, the US carrier PANAGRA en-
joyed cabotage rights in Chile, sharing sched-
uled service within the country with LAN.
Cabotage traffic for foreign airlines, however,
is now prohibited. Foreign airlines are al-

lowed to operate scheduled services to Chile on
the basis of concessions granted by the Chil-
ean CAB. Other foreign flights over Chilean
territory must also be authorized by this body.

d. Promotion of Other Civil Aviation Ac-
tivity.

LAN is awarded an annual subsidy for air-
port development. However, the amount of
funds allotted to LAN or through other agen-
cies for the development and improvement of
air facilities and navigation aids has been
very limited. The continued inability of the
government to finance adequate facilities and
navigational aids for LAN, as well as the reluc-
tance of the air force to cooperate in this re-
spect, has prevented, for example, the estab-
lishment of regular all-year service to the
south of Santiago. The limited funds which
have been available, therefore, have neces-
sarily been used for the improvement. and
maintenance of Chile’s international airports.

The government is anxious to support and
encourage aero clubs, but has been able to sub-
sidize this activity only to a limited extent. In
spite of insufficient funds and lack of adequate
flying equipment and spare parts, however,
aero club flying in Chile has increased rapidly.

There is no aircraft engine or airframe in-
dustry in Chile. .

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Until 1947, it appeared that Chilean air pol-
icy endorsed restriction of Fifth Freedom
rights for foreign air. carriers. In May 1947,
however, Chile changed its attitude and con-
cluded a liberal (Bermuda type) air agreement
with the US. Chile followed the form of this
agreement in other bilateral negotiations
shortly after the US agreement was concluded.
The civil aviation policy of Chile, therefore, is
directly opposed to the Argentine-sponsored
principles of a “regional cabotage” bloc and a
predetermined division of traffic (see Argen-
tina, Section 3, International Civil Aviation
Policy). On the other hand, Chilean policy
has had to take into account the country’s
peculiar geographical position with respect to
Latin American trunk airline routes, especially
the relatively isolated location of its capital
and principal city, Santiago. Recognizing

super
Page-39
sufhrr 39

that an unrestricted aviation policy toward
foreign carriers would probably result in many
international flights overflying Chilean terri-
tory (en route to Buenos Aires, for example,
via the west coast of South America), the Gov-
ernment of Chile has followed an international
air transport policy designed to assure service
to Chile on the principal airline routes of the
area. It has therefore insisted that air car-
riers crossing Chile make at least one traffic
stop within the country, direct or connecting
service to Santiago being mandatory.

Chile now has bilateral air transport agree-
ments with the US, the UK, Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, and Peru.

b. International Organizations.

Chile has experienced considerable difficulty
in financing delegations to meetings of the In-
ternational Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), of which the country has been a
member since early 1947. It was not repre-
sented, for example, at the important Novem-
ber 1947 ICAO Assembly meeting in Geneva.
Some high government circles, particularly
the military, are seriously considering Chile’s
withdrawal from ICAO, allegedly because of
the acute shortage of dollar exchange in Chile.
The civilian elements concerned with aviation,
however, which are more actively promoting
civil air activities in the country, are strongly
opposed to withdrawal of Chile’s international
representation. Outstanding among this
group, as well as in his contribution to the
progress of civil aviation in Chile, is Edward
Hamilton, Secretary-General of the Chilean
Civil Aeronautics Board and Chief of the Divi-
sion of Law and Air Transport in the Direc-
torate General of Aeronautics. He has been
a leader both in Chilean aviation and in its
representation abroad, and has consistently
supported the liberal aviation principles advo-
cated throughout the world by the US.

LAN is a member of the International Air
Transport Association (IATA).

c. US Technical Assistance.

A US Civil Aviation Technical Assistance
Mission, set up in Chile in 1948, submitted
numerous recommendations to the Chilean
Government for improvement of the country’s
civil aviation facilities. Chile is now request-

ing the services of an airways expert when a
new US mission can be assigned.

4. Airlines.

a. Chilean Scheduled Airlines.

From 1932, when it was organized, until
early 1949, the Chilean national airline LAN
(Linea Aerea Nacional) , enjoyed a monopoly of
Chilean-flag scheduled air transportation. In
May and June of 1949, however, concessions
were granted to two small Chilean airlines to
conduct scheduled services supplementing
LAN operations.

A number of factors have hampered LAN’s
efforts to expand and improve its services. In
1948, for instance, the company was unable to
fulfill its new flight schedules when its four
new Martin 202 aircraft were grounded for
manufacturer’s design changes. Overhaul
and repair difficulties with these same aircraft
again interfered with flight schedules in the
summer of 1949. Moreover, lack of adequate
airfield, air navigation, and meteorological fa-
cilities in the southern part of the country has
handicapped LAN’s efforts to provide regular
service in that region. The company has:also
been plagued with personnel problems to the
extent that a full-scale investigation of the
company’s operations was recently ordered,
with a view to eventual reorganization.

Government subsidization of LAN opera-
tions has been increased considerably since
1940. Continued heavy subsidies, however,
are required to cover the company’s operating
deficits. Some economies have been effected
through the joint maintenance by LAN and
PANAGRA of a meteorological service at San-
tiago which supplies all aircraft with weather
data.

(1) LAN (Linea Aerea Nacional).

Routes:

Domestic: The main domestic route oper-
ated by LAN stretches the full length of Chile
from Arica in the north, on the Peruvian
border, to Punta Arenas in the extreme south
of Chile, on the Straits of Magellan.

International: LAN operates one interna-
tional route, a non-stop service from Santiago
to Buenos Aires, using its Martin 202’s. LAN
has long planned to inaugurate service to
Lima, Peru, and to La Paz, Bolivia, on the basis

suffer
Page-40
40 : SEC ft T
Fs
AIRLINES OF CHILE
( October, 1949)
. Number
Airline Unduplicated Scheduled of Aircraft Ownership
Route Miles* |Miles per Weeklvarious Types

LAN 2,997 26,331 20 100% Govt.
LIPA SUR 567 8,964 6 100% Private
TOTAL 3,564 35,295 26

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline.

of bilateral air agreements which Chile has
with those countries. These plans have been
held up, however, principally because of LAN’s
equipment problems.
Equipment:

4 Martin 202

6 DC-3

4 Lockheed Lodestar

6 Lockheed Electra

LAN is now taking delivery on its order for
six De Havilland “Dove” aircraft to be used in
“feeder-line” service. These aircraft are being
acquired from the UK chiefly because of at-
tractive credit terms and Chile’s prevailing
dollar shortage.

Ownership: 100 percent Chilean Govern-
ment,

(2) LIPA-SUR (Linea Aerea Pacifico Sur).

Routes: LIPA-SUR was authorized by the
Chilean CAB early in 1948 to operate an air
taxi service between Santiago and the tourist
districts in the southern lake regions of Chile.
In July 1949, it was authorized to conduct
scheduled service over this route and was des-
ignated by the Chilean CAB to operate be-
tween Santiago and San Carlos de Bariloche,
Argentina. Authority for Chilean service
into this Argentine tourist area is derived from
the Argentine-Chilean Air Agreement of De-
cember 1948. LIPA-SUR’s permit from the
Chilean Government for scheduled services is

of three years’ duration.
‘

ORE Tr-750

Equipment:
3 De Havilland Dragon
2 Republic Seabee
1 Percival Proctor

Ownership: Believed to be 100 percent pri-
vate Chilean.
(3) Servicio Aereo Austral
Routes: The newly-organized air taxi serv-
ice has also been authorized to operate in the
southern region of Chile.
Equipment:
1 De Havilland Dove
1 Grumman Widgeon

Ownership: Owned outright by Sr. Carlos A.
Avel Krefft, a Chilean national.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

PANAGRA, the US carrier which started
service to Chile in 1929, continues to be the
largest single foreign carrier operating into
the country. After‘many months of intense
negotiation with the Chilean Civil Aeronau-
tics Board, an arrangement was worked out in
1948 permitting certain changes in PANAGRA
service. This arrangement, however, was con-
cluded only after Chilean fears had been al-
layed that Santiago would be increasingly by-
passed in PANAGRA'S operations from Lima
and La Paz to Buenos Aires.

BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corpora-
tion), the only European carrier to operate di-
rectly to Chile, terminates both its west and
east coast services at Santiago, although the
service between that city and Buenos Aires is

SEZRET
¥
Page-41
seofter 41

reported to have been temporarily discon-
tinued. In April 1948, LAN signed a stand-
ard IATA form inter-line agreement with the
Royal Dutch Airlines. (KLM), whereby LAN
feeds Europe-bound traffic to KLM at Buenos
Aires.

A special agreement between LAN and the
Argentine carrier, FAMA, provides for a divi-
sion of capacity on the Santiago-Buenos Aires

route. Both airlines fly the route non-stop,
while a second Argentine carrier, ZONDA,
serves the two cities via Mendoza, Argentina.
Under the Chilean-Argentine bilateral air
agreement, moreover, a third Argentine air-
line, Aeroposta, is operating twice-a-week
service between Punta Arenas, Chile, and Rio
Gallegos, Argentina, where connection is made
for flights to other points in Argentina.

sgh
Page-42
sfoaer

APPENDIX E

COLOMBIA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Civil aviation in Colombia is the responsi-
bility of a Directorate of Civil Aeronautics
(DAC) acting under the jurisdiction of the
Ministry of War. Following a series of air ac-
cidents early in 1947 which were attributable
largely to lack of government attention to avi-
ation matters, the DAC was reorganized on the
model of the US Civil Aeronautics Administra-
tion and given increased powers. The ex-
panded organization now includes five depart-
ments: Operations, Engineering, Instruction,
Economics, and Administration. By a decree
on 22.July 1948, a National Council of Trans-
portation was created under the Ministry of
Public Works to coordinate and regulate all
forms of transportation in Colombia. Its
eight members include the Director of Civil
Aeronautics and a representative of the do-
mestic airlines. The chart below. indicates
the relationship between the civil aviation
agencies of Colombia.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.
With the assistance of the US Civil Aviation
Mission, revision of the existing Manual of

Regulations was effected during 1948, making
the current regulations similar to those of the
US Civil Aeronautics Administration.

Exchange control regulations have seriously
affected international airline operations in
Colombia by reducing ticket sales, increasing
the costs of operation, and limiting or pro-
hibiting the purchase of new equipment and
spare parts.

b. Regulation of Colombian Airlines.

It is Colombian policy to promote domestic
air transport enterprises and protect them
from outside competition. Colombian airlines
are required by law to be at least 51 percent
owned by Colombian citizens. With the ex-
ception, however, of its small stock ownership
(2.8 percent) in the principal Colombian air-
line, AVIANCA, the Colombian Government
does not actively participate in the commer-
cial air transport field. Although the govern-
ment does not subsidize airlines directly, it
provides limited aid through air mail con-
tracts. AVIANCA had a monopoly of Colom-
bian air mail transportation until December
1948, when the government signed a mail con-
tract with a small irregular cargo carrier,
SAM, which is largely US-controlled. In ef-
fect, AVIANCA’s contract makes it the postal

 

Ministry of Public Works

 

Ministry of War

 

 

 

 

 

National Council
of Transportation

 

Directorate of Civil Aeronautics

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Operations Engineering

 

 

 

 

 

Instruction

Economics Administration

 

 

 

 

 

 

seopter

Co-aroloav)

ORE Tr-850

43
Page-43
44 sroker

department for all the domestic air mail which
it carries, because the airline is required to
maintain its own postal agencies and to trans-
port and deliver domestic air mail. The SAM
service, which has been very successful, is also
presumably required to act as a postal agency
for the mail it carries.

The Directorate of Aeronautics (DAC), the
Colombian Government’s regulatory agency
for civil aviation, has taken little action to
control airline competition or regulate rates
and routes. As a result, there was a postwar
period of intense competition in Colombian air
transport, including a severe rate war. The
reorganization of the DAC in 1947 improved
this situation somewhat, but the rate war con-
tinued well into 1948. One of the major air-
lines, TACA de Colombia, was forced to sus-
pend operations early in 1947 and six smaller
carriers suspended services during 1948 be-
cause of financial difficulties. Although three
small companies, AFRYPESCA, Aerotaxi and
SAETA, are also listed as scheduled Colombian
carriers, only AVIANCA and LANSA are of
much significance as scheduled operators.
There are about five other small non-scheduled
passenger or cargo services.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Cabotage traffic in Colombia is reserved for
the domestic airlines. Foreign airlines must
receive a Foreign Air Carrier Permit to oper-
ate commercially to Colombian cities, al-
though most such operations are conducted in
accordance with inter-governmental air agree-
ments. In 1948, Colombia’s previously restric-
tive policy toward foreign non-scheduled oper-
ators was considerably relaxed.

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Colombian civil airports have been owned
and developed for the most part by Colombian
airline companies, but the Government seems
to have in mind an eventual nationalization
program. Private ownership of all civil air-
ports forced each airline to develop its own
facilities, until the government required the
airports to be opened to all traffic in 1948. By
that time, LANSA had built duplicate facilities
at many points also served by AVIANCA, with
the result that only the smaller companies
were substantially benefited by the change.

The government, however, now controls new
airfield construction and six new airports were
completed during 1948 under Government
sponsorship.

In 1947, the Government of Colombia en-
couraged the formation of an aeronautical ra-
dio organization to operate all air navigation
facilities. Since the airlines concerned were
unable to agree on the details of such a plan,
however, nothing was accomplished, and
radio facilities are still maintained by the air-
line companies. As a result of surveys made
by the US Civil Aviation Mission to Colombia
in conjunction with Colombian Officials, plans
are being developed for installing a modern
system of traffic control and airways-commu-
nication.

A law of 1948 authorizes the DAC to grant
each Colombian aero club a yearly subsidy.
No grants have been made to date, however,
since none of the clubs, which are composed
for the most part of wealthy persons, has been
in need of funds.

The Instituto Tecnico de Aviacion (ITECA)
continues to be the only school in Colombia
offering courses in all phases of aircraft’ me-
chanics and operation. Recently, however,
reduced funds have curtailed its program. A
plan is now under consideration by the DAC
and the Colombian airlines for a training cen-
ter to develop operating personnel for the air-
lines. Although the government would con-
tribute financially to such an organization, it
would be operated as an independent com-
pany.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Colombia has not followed a consistent or
well-defined policy with respect to interna-
tional air transport. Colombian aviation offi-
cials have stated that their country’s support
at international conferences for proposals re-
stricting Fifth Freedom privileges has been
based upon Colombia's desire to retain the bi-
lateral bargaining advantage inherent in con-
trol of such privileges, rather than upon any
policy designed to withhold Fifth Freedom
traffic from foreign carriers. Nevertheless,
Colombia continues to favor the early conclu-
sion of a multilateral agreement on air rights.

aa
Page-44
segher 45

In spite of efforts to renegotiate the 1929
Clay elloge exchange of notes, the ex-
change still stands as the only air transport
agreement between Colombia and the US.
One obstacle to the conclusion of a new bilat-
eral air agreement was removed by the US
Civil Aeronautics Board’s recent grant of a
Bogota-New York route to AVIANCA under
authority of the 1929 exchange of notes,
thereby placing AVIANCA on a more equal
footing with Pan American Airways and
AGRA

Colombia's only other bilateral air agree-
are Bermuda-type agreements con-
with the UK and the Netherlands.

b. International Organizations.

Colombia has actively participated in and
given support to the international Civil
éviation Organization (ICAO). AVIANCA is
the only Colombian airline which is a member
of the International Air Transport Association
(IATA).

ec. US Technical Assistance.

The US Civil Aviation Mission Agreement
of December 1947 was implemented by the
arrival of a US mission in Bogota in March
1948. This group surveyed Colombian needs
in air transport control, radio communica-
tions. and flight and maintenance personnel
training. It participated actively in revising
the Manual of Regulations and in establishing
procedures for personnel licensing. The Mis-
sion has also assisted in work on Aviation
Training and Scholarship programs.

 

   

  
 

   

 

 

 

 

4. Airlines.

a. Colombian Scheduled Airlines.

Colombia was the first country in Latin
America to enjoy the advantages of air trans-
portation. Shortly after World War I, the
Sociedad Colomboa-Alemanda de Transportes
Aereos (SCADTA) commenced services link-
ing Bogota with Barranquilla, Colombia’s
chief port. Since the most heavily populated
part of Colombia consists of a series of moun-
tain ranges, separated by valleys in which the
main on centers are located, the grad-
ual extension of air transport services to inter-
connect these centers and intermediate towns

   

 

 

has been of great value in unifying the
country, - .

When SCADTA was reorganized as
AVIANCA in 1940, its substantial German in-
fluence was removed. Since then, the airline
has been. jointly owned by Colombian and US
interests, the latter being represented by Pan
American World Airways (PAA).

Numerous Colombian airlines were formed
after World War II. Some have disappeared,
while a few others have survived as non-
scheduled operators. Five new companies
commenced operations during 1948, while six
others suspended services. In addition to
AVIANCA and LANSA, the two principal
scheduled operators in Colombia, three smaller
enterprises (SAETA, AFRYPESCA, and Aero-
taxi) operate regularly scheduled flights
within the country. The respective share of
the total Colombian passenger and cargo traf-
fic carried by each domestic airline during
1948 is shown in the following table:

Percentage of Percentage of
Passenger Traffic Cargo Traffic

AVIANCA 60.3 52.1
LANSA 28.5 16.6
SAETA 6.5 41
AIDA 04 05
Acrotaxi 0.2 (ess than .05)
AFRYPESCA (less than .05) 0.2
(6 months only)
SAM 14.9
LATCO 2.3
Servicio Aereo Ll
Oil Companies and others 4.1 8.2

Although PAA holds a large percentage of
the stock in AVIANCA (47.7 percent), its abil-
ity to control AVIANCA policies and opera-
tions is limited by Colombian law, which stipu-
lJates that no stockholder, however many
shares he may control, may vote more than 25
percent of the total shares represented at any
meeting.

Both AVIANCA and LANSA are financially
sound and have good safety records. AVI-
ANCA will continue to operate most of the ra-
dio facilities until the proposed airways com-
munications system is actually established.

(1) AVIANCA (Aerovias Nacionales de Co-
lombia S.A.).

Routes:

Domestic: One group of AVIANCA routes
stretches the full length of Colombia covering
Page-45
46 Bugees

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF COLOMBIA
( October, 1949 )
. Number of
Airline Ronee aie Miter «| Aireratt Ownership
oute 1LeS' 11es per Wee: (various Ty;
pes)
49.1% Private
Avianca 6,962 103,285 32 Pd ra
0.4% Other
Lansa 3,644 68,997 15 (eos irate
. ‘oreign
30.0% i
SAETA 85 2,460 4 { 70.0% alma
Aerotaxi 695 4,218 9 100 % Avianca
AFRYPESCA 568 1,418 1 Unknown
TOTAL 11,954 180,378 61
* The term ‘‘Unduplicated” refers only to those route miles
which are not duplicated by an individual airline. ORE Tr-950

the mountainous central and western regions
of the country. In this region are the major
cities of Colombia, which are all served by
AVIANCA. Another group of routes, served
with less frequency, radiates out from Villa-
vicencio and covers the western and central
portions of the relatively flat, undeveloped
eastern part of the country.

International: AVIANCA’s international
routes extend to Ecuador, the US, and Pan-
ama. The route to Ecuador not only connects
the two countries, but extends the full length
of Ecuador. In April 1949, AVIANCA com-
menced twice-weekly operations between Bo-
gota and New York, via Barranquilla and
Miami, on the basis of a permit granted by the
US Civil Aeronautics Board in December 1948.

Equipment:
3 DC-4
3 C-54 (cargo)
16 DC-3
8 C-47 (cargo and passengers)
2 PBY-5A

Ownership:

Colombian nationals 49.1 percent
Colombian Government 2.8 percent
Pan American 47.7 percent

Other 0.4 percent
(2) LANSA (Lineas Aereas Nacionales,
S.A.).
Routes:

Domestic: In general, the routes of LANSA
parallel those of AVIANCA, serving all the
principal cities in the central part of Colombia.
LANSA serves only three minor cities, Lorica,
Fundacion and Valledupar (all in the north),
not also served by AVIANCA.

International: LANSA operates only one in-
ternational route, from Bogota to Caracas,
Venezuela. LANSA has an inter-company
traffic agreement with the Venezuelan airline,
LAV, on this route.

Equipment: 15 DC-3

Ownership:

Colombian nationals
Foreign interests

99.5 percent
0.5 percent

sefrer
Page-46
sufhxr 47

(3) SAETA (Sociedad Aeronautica de To-
lima, S.A.).

Routes: Bogota-Girardot-Ibague

Equipment: 4 C-47 (one passenger and three
cargo)

Ownership: Approximately 30 percent owned
by AVIANCA. .The remainder is believed to
be in private Colombian hands.

(4) AEROTAXI (Aerotaxi de Colombia,
Ltda.).

Routes: Aerotaxi serves Barranquilla, Car-
tagena, and about fifteen other cities in the
northwestern part of the country.

Equipment:

8 Cessna 190 and 195
1 Cessna 170

Ownership: 100 percent owned by AVIANCA.

(5) AFRYPESCA (Aviacion Refrigeracion y
Pesca).

Routes: AFRYPESCA serves approximately
eight towns in the northeastern part of Co-
lombia.

Ownership: Unknown

Equipment: 1 C-47

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

The following foreign air carriers operate to
or through Colombia, serving the cities indi-
cated:

Pan American World Airways: Direct serv-
ice from Barranquilla to the US, to Panama,
and to Venezuela.

Uraba, Medellin and Central
(UMCA): Medellin-Panama.

PANAGRA: Cali (on west coast service be-
tween Panama and Peru)

KLM (Royal Dutch Airlines): Barranquilla
(on Aruba-Panama service)

BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corpora-
tion): Barranquilla (en route to Lima, Peru
from Kingston, Jamaica)

TACA de Venezuela: Bogota to Caracas serv-
ice.

c. Foreign Non-Scheduled Operations.

As a result of a decline in import cargo and
the virtual non-existence of export cargo for
air transport, few US non-scheduled cargo
carriers have taken advantage of Colombia’s
liberalized policy toward this type of opera-
tion since 1948.

Airways

sufeer
Page-47
seeks

APPENDIX F

COSTA RICA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

A Civil Aviation Board was formed under
the Ministry of Government in 1948 to control
and regulate matters pertaining to civil and
military aviation. The Board, similar to the
Civil Aeronautics Board in the US, formulates
rules and regulations for the registry of air-
craft, licensing of pilots, granting of landing
permits, and other matters pertaining to civil
aviation.

2. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The Junta Government on 18 October 1949
approved a new general civil aviation law, pat-
terned largely on the civil aeronautics regula-
tions of the US, and some changes suggested
by the legal section of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO).

3. Costa Rican Civil Air Policy.

Largely as a result of the political and mili-
tary difficulties which have beset Costa Rica
during the past two years, regulation of civil
aviation affairs has been relegated to a rather
minor consideration. Air transport, never-
theless, plays a highly important role in the
economy of Costa Rica, providing in many
cases, the sole means of freight and passenger
transportation between the capital and outly-
ing sections of country. International air-
lines continue to provide the most practical
and popular means of passenger transporta-
tion between Costa Rica and other countries.
International traffic originating and terminat-
ing in the capital, San Jose, showed a consid-
erable decrease during 1948 as a result, no
doubt, of the unsettled political conditions in
Costa Rica. During the revolution of March-
April 1948, and again during the attempted
invasion from Nicaragua in December 1948,
the facilities and equipment of the domestic
transport companies were commandeered and

“f

Cp AS blank

RET

put to use for military purposes. None of the
international facilities was molested, but for
a short time during the revolution interna-
tional airlines suspended operations to Costa
Rica.

There has been considerable discussion of
several proposed sites for a new international
airport near San Jose. Since the government
does not have sufficient funds for the project
and would have to depend on a loan from
either a US bank, the local air companies, or
the World Bank, improvement of the existing
airport will probably be undertaken: The
Junta of Government, however, has hoped
that the US will become interested in the con-
struction of an airfield at San Jose in view of
its proximity to the Panama Canal. Other
than this project, little expansion of existing
facilities is planned.

Costa Rica has concluded no bilateral air
transport agreements, and is not a member of
the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO).

4. Airlines.

a. Costa Rican Scheduled Airlines.

Unless additional new airports are con-
structed in Costa Rica, domestic air transport
operations will be limited to approximately
the present pattern. The three domestic air-
lines which presently serve Costa Rica are:
Compania de Transportes Aereos Centro
Americanos de Costa Rica (TACA de Costa
Rica), Lineas Aereas Costarricenses, S. A.
(LACSA), and Aerovias Occidentales, S. A.
(Occidentales). Most of the towns and vil-
lages in the country with landing facilities
are now served by one or more of these air-
lines, while several points along the Pacific
Coast and in Guanacaste are served by two
or even three of the domestic companies. A
highly uneconomic and intensely competitive
condition in several parts of the country has

49
Page-48
50 : sxgasr

resulted from the Civil Aviation Board’s prac-
tice of licensing virtually any route and any
frequency requested by the local airlines.
Thus, twice a week service by both TACA de
Costa Rica and LACSA has, at some points,
been on the same day instead of being stag-
gered to furnish more frequent service. In
spite of the interruption of services during the
periods of fighting in 1948, TACA de Costa
Rica lost very little money on route opera-
tions and actually made money on the busi-
ness of their maintenance and overhaul shops
in San Jose. On the other hand, LACSA
claims to have lost money throughout the pe-
riod, but more recently it has begun to oper-
ate at a profit. By a decree of 15 September
1949 LACSA was designated the Costa Rican
flag carrier for international operations and
especially to operate routes to Miami, New
Orleans, and Brownsville. (As of 20 Novem-
ber 1949, no application had been filed by
LACSA to the US CAB for such routes.)
Aerovias Occidentales, an American-owned
company, started operations in 1948 with two
Boeing 247-D’s which it operated on the lucra-
tive west coast route until it became necessary
to cannibalize one of the planes to obtain parts
for the other. It is a shoestring operation
and has had rough going from the start. At
the present time the company is doing fairly
well financially considering the fact that it

has no shops and only the one plane which
generally operates at capacity. In view of
the age and condition of its equipment, Occi-
dentales will not be able to operate much
longer unless it can obtain new aircraft.

1. Occidentales (Aerovias Occidentales,
S.A).

Routes: Occidentales connects San Jose
with a few points in the southern part of Costa
Rica.

Equipment: 1 Boeing 247-D

Ownership: 100 percent private US. Occi-
dentales was established by two US citizens
and received official Costa Rican authoriza-
tion to operate freight and passenger services
in 1947. International operations are subject
to special approval.

2. TACA de Costa Rica (Compania de
Transportes Aereos Centro Americanos de
Costa Rica).

Routes: TACA de Costa Rica operates from
San Jose, Costa Rica’s capital, principally to
the interior and to numerous points along the
Pacific coast. Only one route extends to the
Atlantic, serving Puerto Limon and extending
along the coast into Panama to Bocas del
Toro.

Equipment: 3 DC-3

1 Lockheed Hudson

Ownership: Believed to be 100 percent pri-

vate Costa Rican. The present TACA de

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF COSTA RICA
( October, 1949 )
Unduplicated Scheduled Number
Airline ae of Aircraft Ownership
Route Miles* |Miles per Week (various Types)
Occidentales 2u 1,582 1 100% U.S.
TACA 609 8,862 4 100% Private
40% Private
LACSA 897 5,710 3 40% U.S.
20% Gov.
TOTAL 1,717 16,154 8
* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which
are not duplicated by an individual airline. ORE Tr-1050

suferr
Page-49
sylener 51

Costa Rica was established in May 1948, fol-
lowing its purchase from the TACA Airways
System by two residents of Costa Rica (see
Panama, Section 4). There is some evidence,
however, that these individuals may be backed
by US interests.

3. LACSA (Lineas Aereas Costarricenses,
S.A).

Routes: LACSA originates all flights at San
Jose and serves principally the northwestern
and southwestern parts of Costa Rica. One
route, San Jose-Los Chiles, extends to the
north, outside these regions. One of the
routes to the southwest, moreover, extends
into Panama to Puerto Armuelles.

Equipment: 3 DC-3
Ownership: 40 percent private Costa Rican

40 percent US (Pan American
World Airways)

20 percent Government of
Costa Rica

LACSA was organized as a Pan
American affiliate in 1945,
receiving official Costa Rican
authorization in December of
that year.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Costa Rica receives scheduled international
airline service from three foreign-flag carriers.
Pan American World Airways (PAA) provides
a number of services to San Jose, over which
traffic is carried to points throughout Central
and South America and to the US. The PAA
routes serve Costa Rica directly from both
Managua, Nicaragua, and Tegucigalpa, Hon-
duras, continuing on to David and Panama
City, Panama. KLM (Royal Dutch Airlines)
connects San Jose with Panama City and
points throughout its extensive Caribbean
network. Connections via KLM are also made
for Europe. San Jose is also the southern
terminus of TACA El Salvador’s Central
American services, which extend through
Managua as far north as Mexico City and New
Orleans.

super
Page-50
sufker

APPENDIX G

CUBA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Cuban civil aviation, as well as various forms
of land transport, is regulated by the National
Transport Commission (CNT), a dependency
of the Ministry of Communications. Although
the general functions of the CNT are pre-
scribed by law, there is considerable competi-
tion between the Ministry of Communications
and the CNT for control over certain aviation
matters. With respect to international route
questions, final authority appears to rest in
the Ministry of Communications (subject. to
the approval of the President of Cuba). The
Inspector General of Airports exercises con-
siderable influence within the CNT. A Civil
Aviation Advisory Committee, composed of
influential Cuban aviation personnel, is called
upon from time to time to act ina purely ad-
visory capacity to the CNT.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

Decree No. 4144 of 3 December 1948 circum-
scribing the authority of the CNT cancelled
Decree No. 3534 of 25 October 1948, but re-
affirmed the provisions of previous decrees
giving the Ministry of Communications final
decision in certain matters handled by the
CNT.

b. Regulation of Cuban Airlines.

The Cuban Government has not yet been
faced with the necessity of formulating strict
policies or regulations to govern its domestic
air services. The Cuban attitude toward air-
line competition, for example, is not yet clear.
Until 1943, Cubana was the only airline oper-
ating in Cuba. Since that time, the govern-
ment has issued permits to both Expreso and
Aerovias “Q” to operate routes which would
compete with Cubana service. The only
route now being operated within the area
served by Cubana (domestically, all of the

 

island of Cuba east of Habana), however, is
the Aerovias “Q” route to Varadero. The few
competitive routes established within Cuba by
Expreso in 1945 have since been discontinued,
On the other hand, both Aerovias “Q” and the
newly organized Aeropostal operate between
Habana and Nueva Gerona, on the Isle of
Pines, and Expreso has also served that island,
but at Santa Fe. .

It is the practice of the National Transport
Commission (CNT) to issue permits for inter-
national routes to any duly constituted Cuban
company. In this connection, the govern-
ment takes the position that simple majority
control by Cubans constitutes Cuban owner-
ship and effective control. It is also the prac-
tice of the government to support permit ap-
plications by all such Cuban companies in a
foreign country, wheh such applications are
based on permits issued by the CNT. The
Cuban Government’s support of a particular
Cuban application for a foreign permit, there-
fore, does not necessarily indicate that the gov-
ernment favors that airline over any other.
On the other hand, political connections ap-
pear to determine to a large degree the favors
received by Cuban airlines for their operations
within the country.

The Cuban Government does not subsidize
any Cuban airline directly. However, Aero-
vias “Q”, Expreso, and Aeropostal receive an
indirect subsidy in the form of free use of the
Cuban Army airfield Camp Colombia, which is
more accessible from Habana than the regu-
lar commercial airfield Rancho Boyeros.

Because of the importance which the gov-
ernment attaches to continued domestic and
international service by Cubana, an impasse
in Cubana’s labor-management relations in
September 1949 prompted the government to
intervene. The dispute involved Cubana’s
plans to resolve its serious financial difficulties
through economies in operations (principally

sefher 53
’

Tp-52 blank 5
Page-51
54

wage and personnel reductions), which are
opposed by certain elements of the govern-
ment, as well as the labor force and the
unions. As a result, the stockholders of Cu-
bana, no longer desiring to continue the com-
pany on a losing basis, voted on 31 October
1949 to dissolve and liquidate the company if
within one month the Board of Directors had
failed to arrange for future operations on a
sound financial basis. Pan American World
Airways (PAA), moreover, a 48 percent share-
holder, had already refused assistance to Cu-
bana until the company is put on a more eco-
nomic operating basis. It is improbable that
the majority of Cubana’s stockholders actually
desire dissolution of the company at this time,
however, and their recent action may have
been designed to influence the government to
take whatever steps are necessary to assure
continued Cubana service. On the other
hand, it is doubtful that the government is
willing to assume the. burden of operating the
company, as it is being urged to do by labor
in the event that Cubana votes to dissolve. It
seems probable, therefore, that the govern-
ment will effect a compromise solution ensur-
ing the continued operation of Cuba’s most
important domestic and international air
carrier.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Cuba, the gateway to Middle America, has
permitted many scheduled international car-
riers to provide service to and through Ha-
bana, both because of the revenue accruing to
Cuba from the airlines’ traffic, and because
the Cuban Government feels that competition
among these carriers tends to keep rates down
and provides incentives for improved services.
Foreign airlines must receive a permit from
the National Transport Commission (CNT).
Bilateral air agreements concluded by Cuba
with other countries govern the terms of per-
mits issued to airlines of those countries.

Non-scheduled carriers, to obtain permis-
sion to operate to Cuba, must demonstrate to
the CNT that no established scheduled airline
can provide the service in question. Cuba has
insisted on recognition of its right to prohibit
non-scheduled commercial aircraft from land-
ing in Cuba if it so desires. (See Section 3.

b.)
suf

seofer

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Improvements are being made on several
airports throughout Cuba. Expansion of the
existing runways at Rancho Boyeros, the prin-
cipal Habana airfield, is now in progress, and
the government has encouraged contractors
to plan construction of other air facilities,
especially a new airport nearer Habana. This
encouragement has included the suspension
for five years of import duties on materials
destined for the construction and operation
of airports, as well as the cancellation for ten
years of taxes on profits, capital, dividends,
and interest for persons or companies con-
structing and operating airports.

A cooperative aeronautical organization,
Aeronautical Radio Company of Cuba
(RACSA), was formed by the airlines late in
1947 to coordinate all aviation communica-
tions. With the exception of Aerovias “Q”,
which has its own communications system, all
of the major airlines which operate in or
through Cuba are members of RACSA and
receive its services. Labor difficulties delayed
commencement of operations until April 1948
and have recurred intermittently since that
time.

The Cuban Pilots Association is composed
entirely of the more than 60 Cubana pilots.

There are about seven private flying schools
in Cuba.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.
While Cuba believes that certain benefits are
to be derived from competition among foreign
air carriers flying ‘to Cuba, it has attempted
to minimize such competition on those routes
flown by its own carriers and to assure Cuban
airlines of a certain share of the traffic.

Cuba has concluded only three bilateral air
agreements, of which those with the UK and
Peru are Bermuda-type. Little is known
about the third agreement, signed recently
with Mexico, but it is possible that it contains
restrictive provisions, in view of Mexico’s pre-
vious restrictive policy. Under the Mexican
agreement, Cuba was granted the Habana-
Merida-Vera Cruz route (presently flown by
Aerovias “Q”), while Mexico retained a mo-
nopoly over the Mexico City-Merida-Habana
route.

RET
Page-52
sufher 55

Intermittent negotiations between the US
and Cuba have not produced a bilateral pact,
largely because of disagreement over what
constitutes substantial ownership or effective
contro] of an airline.

b. International Organizations.

Upon deposit of its unreserved ratification
of the Chicago Convention in June 1949, Cuba
was admitted as the 54th member of the Inter-
national Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
When Cuba had earlier ratified the Conven-
tion in April 1947, it had made a reservation
on Article 5 in the belief that the Article al-
Jowed non-scheduled commercial operators to
land in Cuba without obtaining prior approval
from Cuban authorities, thus contravening
Cuban law. Cuban objections have been
withdrawn in view of the current widespread
practice of interpreting the “limitations”
which may be imposed on such flights as per-
mitting any country to prohibit them. Al-
though not a full-fledged member of ICAO un-
til 1949, Cuba has indicated an active inter-
est in its proceedings by sending observers to
most meetings of the organization.

Cubana is a member of the International
Air Transport Association.

c. US Technical Assistance.

Various technical specialists have been as-
signed to Habana for short periods of time by
the US Civil Aeronautics Administration.

4. Airlines.

a. Cuban Scheduled Airlines.

Only four Cuban airlines can be considered
scheduled operators at present, although there
are three or four other Cuban air transport
companies attempting to organize scheduled
or charter services of various types. The four
scheduled airlines are: Cubana, Aerovias
“Q”, Aeropostal, and Expreso.

From 1929, when it introduced domestic air
transportation to Cuba, until 1943, Cubana
was the only airline operating in Cuba. It
operated exclusively within the country until
1946, when it was authorized by the US to
add the important Habana-Miami route to its
system. Cubana provides such valuable serv-
ice to Cuba both domestically and inter-
nationally that the government has inter-
vened in an effort to prevent Cubana’s current

financial difficulties from forcing dissolution
and liquidation of the company.

The wholly Cuban-owned Aerovias “Q”, or-
ganized in 1945, has also experienced consider-
able financial difficulty, but is gradually ex-
panding services under the close supervision
of Manuel Quevedo, its president and general
manager, who is principally responsible for
having built Aerovias “Q” into the most stable,
dependable, and efficient airline in Cuba. It
is still awaiting CAB action on its request for
additional lucrative routes to the US. For
many months, Aerovias “Q” was the only
Cuban carrier to enjoy the privilege of using
the military field, Campo Colombia, which is
nearer Habana than the regular Habana com-
mercial airport, Rancho Boyeros.

Cuba Aeropostal commenced scheduled op-
erations on its Habana-Isle of Pines route in
May 1949. It has recently applied to the US
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) for a permit
to operate scheduled passenger service on its
present non-scheduled cargo route to Miami.
Aeropostal appears to be backed by the infiu-
ential Jose M. Aleman, former Cuban senator
and cabinet officer. The President of Aero-
postal denies that Aleman owns or finances
the company, but admits that he has aided in
obtaining permits from the government. In
any event, Aeropostal apparently has very ade-
quate financial resources.

Expreso inaugurated service on several do-
mestic routes in 1945, but all domestic opera-
tions except that to the Isle of Pines were dis-
continued some time later. Internationally,
however, Expreso is continuing to operate
more or less regular flights between Habana
and Miami, while its application for renewal
of its permit for this route is being considered
by the CAB. The company’s financial situa-
tion has steadily deteriorated, and its opera-
tions have been unstable. This condition is
largely the result of insufficient revenue and
the death of a former Expreso benefactor, who
had provided funds and equipment for the air-
line. Expreso’s airmail contract, moreover,
was cancelled by the Cuban Government in
June 1949 for failure to adhere to schedule. A
new contract, however, was signed in August,
providing an increased rate for transporting
mail. Although its present owner is reported-

segfer
Page-53
7 tf
56 : sugker

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF CUBA
( October, 1949 )
; Number
aay} Unduplicated Scheduled a .
Airline Route Miles* Miles per Week of Aircraft Ownership
(Various Types)
Aerovias ‘Q’’ 1,205 12,920 8 100% Private
, 52% Private
587
Cubana 6, 71,127 10 48% U.S.
Aeropostal 83 1,162 7 | 100% Private
E 325 1,840 2 60.46% Private
—- , {coast U.S.
TOTAL 8,200 93,049 27

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline.

ly Rafael Mendoza, a close friend of President
Prio of Cuba, the favors Expreso expected from
its close government connections have not
materialized, and its future is very uncertain.

(1) Aerovias “Q”, S.A.

Routes: Aerovias “Q” connects Habana
with Varadero, a north Cuban resort, and with
the Isle of Pines. Two international routes
are operated by Aerovias “Q”, providing serv-
ice from Habana to Key West, Florida, and
to the Mexican cities of Merida and Vera Cruz.
Aerovias “Q” has also applied to the US Civil
Aeronautics Board for permission to operate
from Habana to Washington and New York,
as well as to several additional points in
Florida.

Equipment: 5 DC-3

1 C-47 (cargo only)
2 C-46

Ownership: 100 percent private Cuban.
Aerovias “Q” was organized in 1945 and be-
gan scheduled operations the following year.

(2) Cubana (Compania Cubana de Avia-
cion, S.A.).

Routes: In its domestic services, Cubana
operates throughout all of Cuba east of Ha-
bana with from one to seven round-trips daily.
In addition to Cubana’s Habana-Miami inter-
national service, the company operates sched-

ORE Tr-1150

uled service from Habana to Madrid, with
non-traffic stops at Bermuda, the Azores and
Portugal.
Equipment: 1 DC-4
7 DC-3
2 Lockheed Electra
Ownership: 52 percent private Cuban
48 percent US (Pan American
World Airways)

Cubana was established in 1929 and has
been affiliated with Pan American World Air-
ways (PAA) since 1932. In 1945, PAA’s in-
terest was reduced from 100 percent to 52 per-
cent and in 1947, in order to satisfy the Cuban
Government requirement that effective con-
trol of Cuban airlines be retained by the coun-
try’s nationals, PAA further reduced its hold-
ings to the present figure.

(3) Aeropostal (Cuba Aeropostal, S.A.).

Routes: Aeropostal’s only scheduled service
is a domestic route from Habana to the Isle of
Pines. Aeropostal operates internationally,
however, between Habana and Miami in con-
tract cargo service, including the transport of
Cuban air mail.

Equipment:

2 DC-3

4 C-46 (cargo only)

1 Lockheed Lodestar (com-
pany use only)

seghen
Page-54
seghut 57

Ownership: 100 percent private Cuban:
Aeropostal was organized in August 1943.

(4) Expreso (Expreso Aereo Inter-Ameri-
cano, S.A.).

Routes: Expreso operates one domestic
route, from Habana to the Isle of Pines, serv-
ing a different city than that served by Aero-
vias “Q” and Aeropostal. Expreso also oper-
ates a service from Habana to Miami, pres-
ently carrying cargo only.

Equipment: Expreso leases 2 C-46 aircraft.

Ownership: 60.46 percent private Cuban.
39.54 percent US (made up of
small holdings).
Expreso was founded in 1942 and started
service in 1943, on the Habana-Miami route.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Cuba is served by eight foreign-flag sched-
uled carriers, including four US, two European
and two Latin American airlines. These car-
riers, which are listed below, all serve Habana,
and Pan American World Airways also oper-

ates extensive Caribbean services through
Camaguay, Cuba.
Airline Nationality Route
Pan American US US to Caribbean
World Airways area, Central
and South
America
Chicago and US US to Venezuela
Southern
Braniff Interna- US US to South
tional Airways America
National Airlines US US to Cuba
KLM (Royal Nether- Netherlands
Dutch Air- lands West Indies,
lines) Europe and
South America
to US-
BOAC (British UK UK to Cuba
Overseas Air-
ways Corpora-
tion)
CMA Mexico Mexico to Cuba
LAV Venezuela Venezuela to US

safer
Page-55
sagher

APPENDIX H

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

The principal civil aviation authority of the
Dominican Republic is the Aviation Division
(Negociado de Aviacion), which functions un-
der the Secretary of State for War and Navy.
Attached to the Aviation Division is an Aero-
nautical Commission consisting of the follow-
ing five members selected by the Executive
Power: two members from the Military Avia-
tion Corps, a specialist on legal matters, a
technical engineer, and a meteorological tech-
nician. The functions of the Commission are
to cooperate with the Aviation Division in the
promotion, development, and regulation of all
forms of civil aviation. This Commission is
apparently the administrative agency of the
Aviation Division.

2. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The functions of the foregoing civil aviation
agencies are outlined in a new civil air navi-
gation law (No. 1915) passed in February,
1949. This law constitutes an expansion of
previous legislation of 1937 and 1945, and in-
corporates new features based on the experi-
ence of other countries with similar legisla-
tion. There appear to be no provisions which
constitute a significant change from recog-
nized international and domestic practices in
the regulation of civil air transportation.

3. Civil Aviation Policy.

The Compania Dominicana de Aviacion C.
por A. (CDA), organized in 1944, is the only
Dominican air transport company ever to op-
erate within the country. It does not receive
a direct subsidy from the Government, but
has a 20-year contract for the carriage of air
mail.

Foreign scheduled airlines must receive spe-
cial authorization from the Executive Power
to operate into the Dominican Republic. For-

sifeer

Le: oben

eign non-scheduled carriers are allowed traf-
fic privileges in the country under the limita-
tions of the new civil air law or regulations
made for its application. Cabotage privileges
may be acquired only by special permission,
which is not known ever to have been granted.

After two years of intermittent negotiations,
a Bermuda-type air agreement was finally
initialed by the US and the Dominican Repub-
lic on 19 July 1949. This is the Dominican
Republic’s only bilateral air agreement.

The Dominican Republic became a member
of the International Civil Aviation Organiza-
tion (ICAO) upon ratification of the Chicago
Convention in January 1946. It has been
represented at most ICAO meetings, but has
not taken an important part in the proceed-
ings.

4, Airlines.

a. Dominican Scheduled Airlines.

Organized as a Pan American World Air-
ways (PAA) affiliate in May 1944, Compania
Dominicana de Aviacion, C. por A. (CDA), the
only airline ever to operate within the country,
began commercial operations two months
later over two domestic routes out of Ciudad
Trujillo to Santiago, and to La Romana via
San Pedro de Macoris. Other domestic routes
have been added gtadually. Although CDA
has never operated scheduled services outside
the Dominican Republic, it does conduct rela-
tively extensive charter operations inter-
nationally. Under the terms of the recently
concluded US-Dominican Republic bilateral
air transport agreement, CDA has been au-
thorized by the Dominican Government to op-
erate services to Miami and to Puerto Rico.
PAA personnel manage the company, but
Dominican Air Force pilots do the flying.

CDA was operating the following undupli-
cate route mileage and weekly scheduled mile-
age as of 1 April 1949:

59
Page-56
60 7 sfouer

Unduplicated Miles Scheduled
Route Miles Per Week
351 2,622

Routes: CDA’s network connects Ciudad
Trujillo with Barahona and La Romana on
the south coast, Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata
on the north coast, and San Juan and Santi-
ago in the interior.

Equipment: 2 DC-3
2 C-46
1 Beechcraft C-45
- Ownership: 60 percent private Dominican
40 percent US (Pan American
World Airways)

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

The Dominican Republic is served by five
foreign scheduled airlines, through which
connections may be made to points in the US,
Central America, and South America.

SE

Pan American World Airways (PAA) serves
Ciudad Trujillo on routes from the US (via
Camguey, Cuba and on some flights Port-au-
Prince, Haiti) to Puerto Rico, points in the
Lesser Antilles, Trinidad, and Caracas, Vene-
zuela (via Curacao).

British West Indian Airways (BWIA) con-
nects Ciudad Trujillo with Kingston and
points in the Lesser Antilles.

Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM) operates to
Ciudad Trujillo from Miami (via Kingston
and Port-au-Prince), directly from Curacao,
from Caracas (via Aruba), and from Bar-
ranquilla, Colombia (also via Aruba).

Aerovias Brasil stops at Ciudad Trujillo on
its service from Brazil to Miami (via Port-of-
Spain and Caracas).

Caribbean-Atlantic Airways (CAA) operates
direct service between Ciudad Trujillo and
San Juan, with connections for the Lesser An-
tilles.

ET
Page-57
suffer

APPENDIX |

ECUADOR

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion. :

Civil aviation in Ecuador is the responsi-
bility of the Department of Civil Aviation
(DAC) acting under the jurisdiction of the
Ecuadoran Air Force Command. The latter,
in turn, is a dependency of the Ministry of De-
fense. The DAC is understaffed and its ac-
tivities are limited by the necessity of strug-
gling for funds in a ministry which naturally
places defense needs ahead of civilian require-
ments. Despite these handicaps, the DAC
has gradually assumed increased direction
over civil aviation matters. It will probably
be transferred soon to the Ministry of Public
Works and Communications. Creation of an
aviation board is under consideration.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The Aerial Traffic Law (No. 946) of 12 Sep-
tember 1936 stipulates that control over do-
mestic and foreign aircraft in Ecuador shall
be exercised through domestic legislation and
in accordance with international agreements.
In 1947 the new administration cancelled the
restrictive measures which had imposed heavy
taxes on airline income and ticket sales. Dur-
ing 1949, the DAC undertook to prepare new
aviation legislation and regulations, for which
a need had developed as air services increased
after the war. This legislation was to be pre-
sented to the Congress in August 1949, but
has been tabled for further consideration.

b. Regulation of Domestic Airlines.

Although Ecuador is anxious to develop all
phases of civil aviation, that country is second
only to Paraguay in its lack of civil aviation
development. Ecuador's difficult terrain fa-
vors extensive use of air transportation, but
lack of funds has prevented adequate develop-
ment of air services and facilities. Ecuador's

sage

inability to meet the emergency transport re-
quirements of the recent earthquake disaster
illustrated the country’s need of a more ex-
tensive air transport network. The US air-
line, PANAGRA, and the Colombian carrier,
AVIANCA, provide the only dependable serv-
ice in Ecuador and these airlines serve only a
few Ecuadoran cities.

Civil aviation, however, has gradually ex-
panded in Ecuador, especially since’ govern-
ment policy became more liberal after the 1947
change of administration. Two Ecuadoran
airline companies have been in operation for
over two years and a few marginal companies
were being organized during 1949. With gov-
ernment policy encouraging expansion, pros-
pects for continued development of the air
transport industry. in Ecuador are favorable.

Operation of airlines is left to private inter-
ests, the government neither subsidizing nor
financing commercial air services.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Ecuador and Bolivia are the only two Latin
American countries permitting foreign airlines
to operate cabotage services. Under contract
with the Ecuadoran Government, PANAGRA
and AVIANCA both serve a half dozen points
within Ecuador and connect it with other
countries through international services.

PANAGRA’s contract to operate in Ecuador,
which expired in February 1949 after twenty
years in force, was renewed in May 1949 after
much discussion with DAC officials. No ma-
jor difficulties were encountered, but there
was some rewording of the contract as a result
of the government’s desire to secure more con-
trol over all air companies.

Braniff Airways, the second carrier desig-
nated by the US for west coast service in South
America, stops at Guayaquil on its Houston-
Rio de Janeiro flights. It recently secured an
air mail contract with the Ecuadoran Govern-
ment.

61
Page-58
62 sues

da. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Development of air facilities has been left
to the airline companies, principally because
public funds are lacking for that purpose.
The limited funds which have been made
available to the Ministry of Defense for air-
field construction have been used by the Air
Command primarily for the development of
military airports. A few civil fields, however,
are being improved and expanded, and others
are gradually being built. Many Ecuadoran
towns, for example, have taken the initiative
of preparing landing fields in order to attract
air services. The Shell Company of Ecuador
has also developed a few airstrips for its op-
erations in the country.

Under its new contract, PANAGRA will con-
tinue to be charged with radio and traffic
control operations, the government retaining
a supervisory authority. Presumably PANA-
GRaA’s past concern over inadequate compen-
sation for this service, as well as difficulties in
enforcement of traffic control regulations, has
been satisfied in the new contract.

The Aero Club de Guayaquil has an active
ground instruction program, but does little
actual flying. Private flying is limited by
lack of funds for the acquisition of desired
equipment and spare parts.

The Escuela Militar de Aeronautica, subsi-
dized entirely by the Ecuadoran and US gov-
ernments, is the only aviation school in Ecua-
dor, and provides training for the Ecuadoran
Air Force (FAE). Its training program has
been aided by the personnel of an advisory US
Air Force Mission to Ecuador.

A Pilots Union was formed in 1948, compris-
ing civilian pilots, mechanics and navigators,
employed by either national or foreign lines
within the national territory. This group
was organized to increase the professional
skills of its members. Although the Union is
permitted to seek legislation to this end, its
statutes prohibit it from engaging in any
other political activity.

There is no airframe or aircraft engine in-
dustry in Ecuador.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Ecuador has encouraged all forms of for-
eign air transportation to serve the country.

Since no Ecuadoran carrier flys international
routes, the Government is not concerned over
competition from large international airlines.
Ecuador's only bilateral air agreement was
signed with the US 9 January 1947 and be-
came effective 24 April 1947. It isa Bermuda-
type agreement.

b. International Organizations.

Ecuador continues to desire membership

in the International Civil Aviation Organiza-
tion, but cannot afford to join.

c. US Technical Assistance.

A US Civil Aviation Mission served in Ecua-
dor on the basis of an agreement signed in De-
cember 1947. Negotiations for continuation
of this assistance were terminated early in
1949, and a formal request for the return of
the mission to Ecuador is now under consid-
eration by the US.

4. Airlines.

a. Ecuadoran Airlines.

Ecuadoran airlines are issued permits to
carry passengers and freight in service to
designated cities and towns without fixed
schedules. Although they are therefore not
strictly scheduled operators, service is main-
tained on a more or less regular basis by the
two airlines listed below. There are about
four other companies conducting small-scale,
non-scheduled operations, and another is
about to be organized.*

(1) ATECA (Aero Transporto Ecuatoriano,
C.A.).

Routes: ATECA serves Guayaquil, Quito,
Manila, and Esmeraldas in competition with
Trasandina. In addition, ATECA serves Tul-
can in the extreme north on the Colombian
border, and Macara in the extreme south on
the Peruvian border. The company is also at-
tempting to initiate service to the eastern

 

* ATECA and TRASANDINA were merged during
April 1950 with a recently organized airline SANTA.
Operations with 4 C-47's and 1 C-46 are now con-
ducted under the name of SANTA (Sociedad Ano-
nima Nacional de Transportes Aereos). Services
nearly duplicate the routes of PANAGRA and Avi-
anca (see section 4. b.)

AREA (Aerovias Euatorian. C.A.J, another re-
cently organized airline, operates a flourishing busi-
ness which provides strong competition for SANTA.

 

sofer
Page-59
sagen 63

 

AIRLINES OF ECUADOR
( October, 1949 )

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

: Number
Airline Unduplicated Scheduled of Aircraft Ownership
: Route Miles* |Miles per Week|(Various Types)
ATECA 780 3,128 7 100% Private
Trasandina 629 3,766 1 100% Private
TOTAL 1,409 6,894 8

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline.

“Oriente” region of Ecuador, which the gov-
ernment has been anxious to develop, but
which is still sparsely populated.
Equipment: 2 C-47
1 Stinson Reliant
3 Stinson Station Wagon
1 Piper Cruiser

Ownership: 100 percent private Ecuadoran.

(2) TRASANDINA (Trasandina Ecuatori-
ana, C.A.).

Routes: TRASANDINA operates through-
out the most populous portion of Ecuador,
serving Quito and Esmeraldas in the north,
Guayaquil and Manta in the central region,
and Cuenca in the south.

Equipment: 1 C-46
Ownership: 100 percent private Ecuadoran.

ORE Tr-1250
b. Foreign Airlines.

PANAGRA operates cabotage services con-
necting the cities of Quito, Guayaquil, Cuenca,
Manta, and Esmeraldas, using DC-3 aircraft.
It has been designated by the Ecuadoran Gov-
ernment to give radio communication and
radio navigational aid to all aircraft in ac-
cordance with fixed rates of compensation.

PANAGRA and another US carrier, Braniff
International Airways, both operate inter-
national service along the west coast of South
America, landing at Guayaquil in Ecuador.
DC-4 and DC-6 aircraft are used by both air-
lines.

AVIANCA, the Colombian airline, connects
Ecuador with Colombia to the north, and in
addition provides scheduled service within
Ecuador to Quito, Guayaquil, Cuenca, and
Manta, using DC-3 aircraft.

segfer
Page-60
sufhet

APPENDIX J

EL SALVADOR

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Control over civil and military aviation in
El Salvador rests with the Chief of Aviation
under the Ministry of National Defense.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

Since there are no airlines operating services
within El Salvador, there has been little need
for legislation on aviation. A few minor mat-
ters, such as air mail rates, have been regu-
lated by executive decrees. The Salvadoran
Government signed a contract in October 1947
with TACA, S.A. (which was incorporated un-
der the laws of El Salvador in 1939 and is
therefore popularly known as TACA El Sal-
vador) designating this airline as its “chosen
instrument” for international services. This
contract will continue in effect until June
1954.

b. Regulation of Salvadoran Airlines.

In contrast to most of the countries of Cen-
tral and South America, El Salvador has re-
garded aviation as of only minor importance
to its internal economy, principally because
the country’s small size makes rapid air trans-
portation unnecessary. El Salvador there-
fore has few fixed policies toward civil aviation,
other than to assure continued international
service to the capital, San Salvador. It was
this consideration which led to El Salvador’s
designation of TACA El Salvador, an airline
controlled by US interests, as its “chosen in-
strument” for such service. Largely because
of the importance attached to TACA service by
El Salvador and other Central American coun-
tries, the US Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB)
granted this airline a three year permit in
March 1949 authorizing operations to the US
as a foreign air carrier. The Salvadoran Gov-
ernment interceded in TACA’s behalf before

  

the CAB during consideration of the TACA
application.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

El Salvador is served by two foreign-flag
scheduled airlines, Pan American World Air-
ways (PAA) of the US and SAHSA of Hon-
duras. The government has opposed the ad-
mission of any other scheduled airlines, how-
ever, since it feels that the country’s air trans-
port requirements are being adequately served
by the present carriers. Air cargo potential
increased sufficiently after the war, however,
for the Salvadoran Government to authorize
a US non-scheduled cargo airline to join in
the cargo service to the country in 1948.

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Although the administration which came to
power in December 1948 has passed no laws
and made no policy statement respecting civil
aviation, it has taken more interest than the
previous administration in building up a
small, efficient military air force and in pro-
moting the Civil Air Club of El Salvador. The
club operates under a permanent concession
by the legislature permitting duty-free entry
of flying equipment, parts, accessories and
gasoline for club members. Only occasional
flights have been made, however, and no flight
training or ground instruction is given. The
government is not known to have given the
club any direct financial support.

Weather and radio navigation facilities at
San Salvador are owned and operated by PAA.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

El Salvador has had no occasion to adopt a
fixed air traffic policy and has concluded no
bilateral air agreements.

b. International Organizations.

El Salvador is a member of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) by virtue

sufaer 65

Tp-td bolane
Page-61
66 . sagker

of adherence to the Chicago Convention in’

June 1947. It is impossible, however, for El
Salvador to appoint delegations with adequate
technical qualifications to participate actively
in conferences of ICAO and other interna-
tional organizations. Its delegates are ad-
mittedly appointed “in order to help the US
in the voting.”

c. US Technical Assistance.

A US Air Force mission has been assigned to
El Salvador since 1947 and has been assisting
with the re-establishment of the Salvadoran
Air Force. The current favorable attitude of
Salvadoran aviation officials toward the US
may be attributed in large part to the influ-
ence of this mission.

4. Airlines.

a. Salvadoran Scheduled Airlines.

TACA, S.A. (or TACA El Salvador), the only
airline incorporated in El Salvador, is an oper-
ating subsidiary of the US-controlled TACA
Airways, S.A., a non-operating holding com-
pany in Panama which owns a 98 percent in-
terest in the Salvadoran airline. Prior to the
organization of TACA El Salvador in 1939,
other Central American operations of the
TACA System had emphasized cargo traffic.
The inauguration of international passenger
service by TACA El Salvador brought TACA
into intense competition with PAA’s Central
American operations, to which TACA subsidi-
aries had formerly provided only supplemen-
tary service.

TACA El Salvador originally served only the
Central American countries, but has since
expanded operations to the US and Mexico.
In May 1948, however, TACA El Salvador
signed an agreement with TACA de Hon-
duras under which the latter now actually
operates the Central American international
routes. International service from El Salva-
dor to Mexico and the US, however, is still
operated by TACA El Salvador. It is reported
that this policy was directed by the Waterman
Steamship Corporation (which controls the
holding company, TACA Airways, S.A.), in
order that TACA El Salvador might concen-
trate on the services to Mexico and the US
which supplement Waterman's surface trans-

portation operations. TACA El Salvador's
present permit to operate to the US as a for-
eign air carrier was granted by the CAB in
February 1949, to be effective for three years.
The extent of TACA'’s operations as of October
1949 is indicated below:

Miles Scheduled

Per Week
23,789

Unduplicated
Route Miles

TACA, S.A. (TACA 2.566

El Salvador)

Routes: TACA, S.A. links both El Salvador
and Guatemala with Mexico City and New Or-
leans. These services connect directly with
service to the capitals of Costa Rica, Nica-
ragua, and Honduras, which is operated by
TACA de Honduras under contract to and in
the name of TACA El Salvador.

Equipment:
2 DC-4
8 DC-3

Ownership: 98 percent owned by TACA Air-
ways, S.A., which in turn is controlled by US
interests (Waterman Steamship Corporation).

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

San Salvador, the capital of El Salvador and
the only point receiving service in the coun-
try, is served on Pan American. World Airways’
routes which parallel those of TACA, S.A.
through most of Central America. The PAA
service, in general, is more extensive than that
of TACA. Moreover, connections with other
PAA routes are made at Mexico City for points
in the US, at Merida, Mexico, for Habana and
the Caribbean, and at Panama for South
America.

Servicio Aereo de Honduras, S.A. (SAHSA)
also operates to El Salvador from Tegucigalpa,
Honduras, via other points in the latter coun-
try

c. Foreign Non-Scheduled Operations.

Skytrain Airways, Inc. of New Orleans re-
ceived a temporary landing permit from the
Salvadoran Government in August 1948 and
commenced fairly regular cargo flights be-
tween New Orleans and E) Salvador. This
operation soon included as many as two flights
weekly, carrying such varied cargoes as live-
stock and small automobiles.

a
Page-62
sngor

APPENDIX K

GUATEMALA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Civil aviation activities in Guatemala are
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Com-
munications and Public Works, acting through
its dependency, the Directorate General of
Civil Aeronautics (DGAC). The government-
owned airline, Compania Guatemalteca de
Aviacion (AVIATECA), however, operates un-
der the direction of the Ministry of Economy
and Labor. It is being urged by some Guate-
malan officials that AVIATECA be transferred
to the Ministry of Communications and Pub-
lic Works, in order to unify governmental con-
trol over all phases of civil aviation.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

A new basic civil aviation law, based on
Venezuela's 1944 Civil Air Law, was made effec-
tive by the DGAC on 7 April 1949, after con-
sultation with AVIATECA, other aviation enti-
ties in Guatemala, and the foreign airlines
serving the country. To supplement this law,
new civil air regulations are now being formu-
lated by the DGAC.

b. Regulation of Guatemalan Airlines.

The Guatemalan Government has granted
the wholly government-owned instrument,
AVIATECA, a monopoly of all internal freight
and passenger traffic. The airline, of course,
is heavily subsidized by the government.
Since surface transportation in Guatemala is
very poor, there is a great need for air charter
services to supplement AVIATECA’s opera-
tions and to accommodate tourists, finca
(plantation) owners, businessmen, and others
who desire transportation to many isolated
parts of the country. To date, however, no
firm has been successful in obtaining the re-
quired license to operate in this manner. The

government's principal objection to this type
of operation seems to be fear of competition
with AVIATECA. In actual fact, however,
charter services would almost certainly be of-
fered only to points which AVIATECA does not
or is not equipped to serve, such as small pri-
vate landing fields.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

The concession of Pan American World Air-
ways (PAA) to operate air and ground serv-
ices in Guatemala is due to expire in 1950.
Since the company has a number of bitter op-
ponents scattered throughout the executive
and legislative branches of the Guatemalan
Government, PAA will probably experience
considerable difficulty in renegotiation of its
contract. The government has been largely
responsible for a number of recent difficulties
experienced by PAA with respect to its native
employees in Guatemala. Moreover, there.are
indications that Guatemala will choose to in-
terpret PAA’s contract rights in such a man-
ner as to invalidate an agreement providing
for compensation to PAA if its facilities should
be taken over upon termination of the present
contract. This restrictive attitude of the
Guatemalan Government may be designed
only to harass PAA further. On the other
hand, in view of Guatemala’s known desire to
extend AVIATECA'’s operations, the govern-
ment’s policy may indicate that pressure is
being exerted on PAA as a means of influenc-
ing the US Civil Aeronautics Board's decision
vegarding AVIATECA’s current application
for a permit to establish scheduled service to
the US.

If AVIATECA initiates scheduled service to
the US, Guatemala’s policy toward both sched-
uled and non-scheduled foreign airlines will
probably become even more restrictive. At
present, TACA Airways is the only other sched-
uled foreign airline serving Guatemala.

safeer 67
Page-63
68 serer

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Three first-class airports were built by the
US during the war under the Airport Develop-
ment Program: Guatemala City, Puerto Bar-
rios, and San Jose. The latter two have been
turned over to the Guatemalan Government
by the USAF, while the third is presently in
process of being transferred. Each of these
three airfields has a 6,000-foot paved runway.
Several other good airfields of smaller size are
also in operation. Since there is still no air
charter service in Guatemala, several isolated
finca owners have also cleared small landing
strips, have acquired aircraft and have taken
flight training in order to improve their trans-
portation situation.

Substantial progress has been made recently
in private flying in Guatemala, principally on
the initiative of two US nationals who reacti-
vated aero club flying in that country after
the war. Their company, known as Aviones
Centro-Americanos, was under contract to the
Aero Club de Guatemala to operate that club,
its flying activities and ground school. The
company also acted as local distributor for
Cessna aircraft and the products of Continen-
tal Motors and Bendix Aviation Corporation.
There has been considerable pessimism con-
cerning the future of the excellent training
program of this organization since it was an-
nounced that management of the club would
pass to Guatemalan control at the end of
March 1949.

PAA and AVIATECA still jointly maintain
the radio aids to navigation in Guatemala,
while PAA and the USAF operate meteorologi-
cal stations. Various arrangements have
been proposed for increased Guatemalan par-
ticipation in these services.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Guatemala has recently assumed a more re-
strictive attitude toward foreign airlines, par-
ticularly since its chosen instrument, AVIA-
TECA, has sought to initiate scheduled service
over a route to the US. (See Section 2, c.).

Guatemala has no bilateral air transport
agreements.

b. International Organizations.

Guatemala became a member of the Inter-
national Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
in April 1947, and has been represented at
most meetings of that organization. The
country, however, has not taken an active part
in ICAO activities. Guatemala is unable in-
dependently to supply the air navigation and
meteorological aids recommended by ICAO,
but would probably participate in joint sup-
port programs for these facilities, with outside
assistance.

c. US Technical Assistance.

(See Section 2, d, concerning wartime, US-
built bases recently. turned over to Guate-
mala.)

4. Airlines.

a. Guatemalan Scheduled Airlines.

Guatemala’s only airline, AVIATECA, is a
government-owned entity expropriated by the
new administration after the 1944 revolt. It
is heavily subsidized, has good maintenance
standards, and has achieved an excellent
safety record. AVIATECA desires to under-
take international services and has applied for
a permit to operate to the US, which is now
under consideration. Inauguration of these
services, however, may also depend on the out-
come of AVIATECA’s plans to acquire three
Martin 202 aircraft.

In October 1949, AVIATECA was operating
the following route miles and miles scheduled
per week:

Unduplicated Miles Scheduled
Route Miles Per Week
1,490 11,558

AVIATECA (Compania Guatemalteca de
Aviacion).

Routes: AVIATECA’s routes, which are at
present only domestic, are concentrated in the
vicinity of Guatemala City, radiating from
that city in all directions. Connections are
also maintained with a lesser network in the
northern part of the country.

Equipment: 6 DC-3

Ownership: 100 percent Guatemalan Gov-
ernment.

RET
Page-64
suffer 69

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Pan American World Airways (PAA) and
TACA Airways, Inc. both serve Guatemala
City from New Orleans, as well as from Mexico
City and points in Central America.

c. Foreign Non-Scheduled Operations.
Two US non-scheduled freight carriers op-
erate fairly regular services to Guatemala.

Skytrain Airways, Inc. has operated up to two
DC-4 flights weekly from New Orleans serving
Guatemala and El Salvador, while NATS Air
Transportation Service (NATS) of Oakland,
California has operated a single C-47 in weekly
service originating in Chicago and flying via
New York and Miami. The NATS service was
originally contracted for by the Guatemalan
Government.

sufher
Page-65
suger

APPENDIX L

HAITI

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

A‘National Commission for Civil Aviation
was created in Haiti in 1948 to function under
the jurisdiction of the Secretariat of State for
Foreign Affairs, The Commission is composed
of representatives of various governmental de-
partments and is charged with the following
general responsibilities: (1) to maintain con-
tact with all national and international civil
aviation organizations; (2) to advise the gov-
ernment on measures relating to the execution
of Haitian aviation laws; and (3) to study and
advise the government on all other aviation
questions.

The Aviation Corps of the Haitian Armed
Forces (Garde d’Haiti) controls and operates
Haiti’s only domestic air transport service.

2. Civil Aviation Policy.

Until 1943, there were no air services within
Haiti. Since that time, Haiti has not permit-
ted a private company to operate domestic air
services, reserving air transport as a monopoly
of the Haitian Air Corps, principally for mili-
tary training purposes. Asa result, there are
no licensed civilian commercial pilots in the
country and only ten licensed private pilots.

The country has had no occasion to develop
a formal international aviation policy other
than to ensure continued adequate service to
Port-au-Prince by scheduled international
carriers. Port-au-Prince has received such
service continuously since 1929. Although
Haiti has been a member of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) since
March 1940, its participation in ICAO activi-
ties has been negligible. No bilateral air
agreements have been concluded by the Hai-
tian Government.

Haiti’s only international airport, Bowen
Field near Port-au-Prince, is maintained and
operated by Pan American World Airways
(PAA) under a Haitian Government lease ef-
fective until January 1960.

3. Airlines.
a. Haitian Scheduled Airlines.

There are no civil airlines operating within
Haiti, as a result of the Haitian Government's
policy of reserving air transport as a monopoly.
of the Aviation Corps of the Haitian Armed
Forces (Garde d’Haiti). The Haitian Air
Corps, which combines military training with
Operation of an airline, was established in May
1943 as an air mail carrier and was authorized
in the following year to accept passenger traf-
fic. Revenue derived from the air transport
service, which operates under the..name
“Garde d’Haiti,” is devoted principally to the
acquisition and maintenance of equipment
and to personnel training. The Garde d’Haiti
operates three scheduled flights weekly
throughout Haiti if payloads are available.
Unscheduled freight service is also main-
tained. Although this carrier has a good
safety record, its passenger operations were
interrupted during 1944-45 as a result of the
poor condition of its flying equipment. Air
mail service, however, was continued during
this period.

As of October 1949, Haiti’s only scheduled
airline, the Garde d’Haiti, was operating a
network of 474 unduplicated route miles and
scheduled 2.570 miles per week.

Garde d’Haiti (Corps d’Aviation de la Garde
Haiti)

Routes: Garde d’Haiti operates exclusively
within Haiti, connecting its capital, Port-au-
Prince, with other coastal cities along the
country’s entire perimeter, as well as with one
point in the interior,

sn fer mM

Lo. To blank 3
Page-66
2 <2 sughnt

Equipment:
1 C-47
2 Beechcraft C-45 (damaged)
2 Cessna C-78
Ownership: 100 percent Government of
Haiti.
bv. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.
Haiti’s capital, Port-au-Prince, is served by
two foreign scheduled carriers, Pan American

SE

World Airways (PAA) and Royal Dutch Air-
lines (KLM), PAA'’s Caribbean operations
include Haiti on flights from the US to the
Dominican Republic and beyond. The KLM
route originates at Curacao and touches
Haiti en route to Kingston, Jamaica. Con-
nections are maintained by both carriers to
other points in Central and South America.

ET
Page-67
suger

APPENDIX M

HONDURAS

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Civil aviation in Honduras is regulated and
supervised by a civil aviation office which is
under the Ministry of War, Navy and Avia-
tion.*

2. Civil Aviation Legislation.

The government recently undertook the re-
vision of the outmoded (1930) civil aviation
legislation and air traffic regulations. Little
has been accomplished on this project to date,
however, partly because some elements in the
government object to the use of US legisla-
tion and regulations as a model on the grounds
that they cannot be adapted to basically dif-
ferent Honduran conditions.**

3. Honduran Civil Aviation Policy.

All scheduled airlines, national or foreign,
must obtain an operating concession author-
ized by the Congress. Honduras admits for-
eign non-scheduled operators only if the coun-
try of origin grants reciprocal privileges to
Honduran non-scheduled carriers. Otherwise
the Honduran Government exercises little con-
trol over airline operations. The government
has a 20 percent interest in the stock of the
Pan American World Airways (PAA) affiliate
in Honduras, SAHSA, but has an investment
in no other domestic or international airline.
Honduras does not subsidize any domestic air

 

* The new Honduran aviation law (see note **)
provides that civil aviation is to be handled by a
Department of Civil Aeronautics which is set up as
a dependency of a new Bureau of Aeronautics under
the jurisdiction of the Ministry of War, Navy and
Aviation.

** A new aviation law, possibly restrictive toward
foreign airlines depending on how it is interpreted,
was put into effect in March 1950. It reflects, how-
ever, the great haste with which it was forced
through the legislature by the air force. Many ar-
ticles are ambiguous or obscure in meaning.

transport company; it does, however, grant
air mail contracts, but in most cases the flat
monthly fee which the government pays does
not cover expenses. Since many points for
which air mail service is contracted do not
have airports, the airlines must freqeuntly
subcontract with connecting surface carriers
to provide the service.

Although facilities are crude and fiying
hazardous, the government has appropriated
very little money to improve airfields or lessen
the hazards of flying. With the exception of
the small appropriations made for the main-
tenance of military aviation facilities, fields
and facilities have been built and maintained
by the airlines.

Honduras has concluded no bilateral air
transport agreements, and is not a member of
the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO).

4. Airlines.
a, Honduran Scheduled Airlines.

Honduras is served by two domestic air-
lines and two international carriers. Pas-
senger and cargo traffic over Honduras’ in-
tensive airline network has grown with sur-
prising rapidity during the past few years.
There is, however, intense and sometimes
bitter competition between the two domestic
scheduled operators, the PAA affiliate, SAHSA,
and the former TACA System Affiliate—now
privately owned—TACA de Honduras. Both
have improved their services and equipment,
and are apparently realizing a modest profit.
Twenty-two towns are served by both, five
more by TACA de Honduras, and one more by
SAHSA. Although both airlines charge ap-
proximately the same rates on most routes,
their efforts to agree on a common uniform
rate schedule have so far been fruitless.
SAHSA has recently been growing more rap-
idly than TACA de Honduras (which was sold

sufrer 73
Page-68
74 SEC

by the TACA system early in 1948 to Hon-
duran citizens), but the latter’s position has
been enhanced as a result of its contract with
TACA El Salvador to operate that airline’s
Central American international routes, al-
though the service is still conducted under the
name of TACA El Salvador.

TAN (Transportes Aereos Nacionales, S.A.),
a Honduran non-scheduled freight airline,
operates from Honduras to Habana and Miami.
TAN is used principally by businessmen and
contractors for bringing freight from the US.
It does not compete directly with either of the
scheduled airlines, since it has confined its
operation to freight. TAN has applied to the
US Civil Aeronautics Board for a permit to
transport passengers, cargo, and mail from
Honduras via Habana to Miami.* TAN uses
C-46’s at present.

(1) SAHSA (Servicio Aereo de Honduras,
S.A).

Routes: SAHSA’s relatively extensive routes
include domestic services in the region north
of Tegucigalpa, as well as to points along the
entire northern coast of Honduras and in the
eastern part of the country. SAHSA also
operates international services linking Tegu-
cigalpa with Belize, the capital of British Hon-
duras, and San Salvador, the capital of El
Salvador.

 

* The CAB granted TAN such a permit for a three-
year period beginning June 1950.

T

Equipment: 6 DC-3

Ownership: 40 percent private Honduran

40 percent US (Pan American World Air-
ways)

20 percent Government of Honduras

SAHSA was established as a Pan American
affiliate by a 1945 contract with the Honduran
Government.

(2) TACA de Honduras (Transportes Aereos
Centroamericanos, S.A.).

Routes: TACA de Honduras serves Teguci-
galpa and all of the other principal cities in
Honduras. An international route is also
operated from Nueva Ocotepeque to San Sal-
vador, the capital of El Salvador. TACA de
Honduras, moreover, operates international
routes from San Salvador south to San Jose,
Costa Rica, under contract to and in the name
of TACA El Salvador (see El Salvador, Section
4,a.).

Equipment:
8 DC-3
1 Lockheed Hudson
2 Avro Anson

Ownership: Believed to be 100 percent pri-
vate Honduran. TACA de Honduras was sold
by the TACA System to two residents of Hon-
duras in February 1948 (see Panama, Section
4). There is some evidence, however, that
these individuals may be backed almost 75 per-
cent by US interests.

 

AIRLINES OF HONDURAS
(October, 1949)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Number
ws Unduplicated Scheduled ‘ ;
Airline ee laa of Aircraft Ownership
Route Miles* |Miles per week (Various Types)

40% Private
SAHSA 1,266 10,194 6 40% U.S.

20% Gov.
TACA 1,060 9,814 il 100% Private
TOTAL 2,326 20,008 17

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline

ORE Tr-1350

SEYRET
Page-69
ougker 15

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Aside from the TACA El Salvador interna-
tional service through Tegucigalpa, which is
actually operated by TACA de Honduras as
indicated above, there is only one foreign-flag
carrier serving Honduras. Tegucigalpa is
served by Pan American World Airways (PAA)

over two routes from Guatemala and El Sal-
vador to. Nicaragua and Costa Rica. PAA’s
operations, which compete in Central America
with those of TACA El Salvador, provide con-
nections from Honduras to points in the US,
as well as throughout Central and South
America.

sufher
Page-70
super

APPENDIX N

MEXICO.

1. Government. Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Civil aviation in Mexico is under the juris-
diction of the Department of Civil Aeronautics
(DAC) in the Ministry of Communications and
Public Works.

In July 1949, a commission was created by
the DAC to study the civil aviation situation
in Mexico and make specific recommendations
for reorganizing air transportation, with
special attention to the international aspects
of the problem. Although this commission is
to act only in an advisory and unofficial ca-
pacity, its recommendations, when published,
will undoubtedly exert considerable influence
on the future of Mexican civil aviation.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil’ Aviation Legislation.

Air transportation in Mexico is governed by
the “Law of General Communications Media
and Means of Transportation,” which among
other matters outlined the governmental or-
ganization for civil aviation and provided for
the regulation of domestic and foreign airlines.
It is required by law that: (1) a majority of
the stock of Mexican airlines must be con-
trolled by Mexican citizens; (2) ninety-five
percent of the personnel must be Mexicans;
and (3) only Mexican pilots may be employed.
The DAC grants permits to Mexican airlines
in two forms. If an operation for which ap-
plication has been made appears justified, a
one-year experimental permit is issued to allow
evaluation of the proposed route. If the air-
line then desires to continue operating the
route, it applies for a permanent concession.
Pending a decision on this application by the
government, the experimental permit con-
tinues in force. Most concessions are granted
for the maximum period of thirty years.

suffer

[g-‘Te blank 3

b. Regulation of Mexican Airlines.

Although the Mexican Government at-
tempts to protect its airlines from foreign com-
petition, it does almost nothing else to aid
the expanding Mexican air transport industry.
Mexico does not pay a direct subsidy to any
airline. Rates paid for the transportation of
mail vary according to the company, but such
payments represent only a nominal subsidy.
Some relief is also granted in the exemption
from import duties of some aviation equip-
ment.

Lack of proper government regulation of
commercial aviation has been largely respon-
sible for the establishment of an uneconomic
amount of competition over domestic routes,
with the result that most of the twenty-eight
scheduled or non-scheduled Mexican airlines
are losing money. The larger scheduled oper-
ators particularly are alarmed over what they
term the “air piracy of shoestring airlines.”
Moreover, Mexico’s traffic potential is not suffi-
cient to support the number of airlines which
the DAC has allowed. Recent personnel
changes in the DAC may improve the situ-
ation, but the establishment of a logical airline
pattern in Mexico would probably require the
elimination of most of the non-scheduled oper-
ators.

The Pan American World Airways affiliate,
Compania Mexicana de Aviacion, S.A. (CMA),
has been favored as Mexico’s unofficial
“chosen instrument” for most of the time it
has operated in Mexico (since 1924). Al-
though CMA has not officially been granted
a monopoly of Mexican flag international
services, it has been awarded the majority of
international routes flown by Mexican carriers.
That its influence with the government may
be waning, however, is indicated by the fact
that Aerovias Guest received the franchise for
the coveted route to Madrid and, contrary to
the early predictions of its critics in Mexico,

qT
Page-71
78 SEQGRET

Aerovias Guest appears to be operating effi-
ciently and with a fair margin of profit over
this route,

Although Mexican law requires a majority
of the stock of domestic airlines to be held by
Mexican citizens, this regulation does not
appear to be universally enforced, since
LAMSA, one of the country’s three leading
trunk route operators, is a United Air Lines
subsidiary wholly owned by US interests.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

In an effort to promote its airlines, Mexico,
to a greater extent than any other Latin
American country, has pursued a restrictive
international aviation policy which aims to
keep foreign airline competition at a minimum
(see Section 3,a). Cabotage traffic, moreover,
is reserved to Mexican airlines by law.

Foreign airlines receive their permits to
operate to Mexico from the DAC. Permits to
airlines of countries with which Mexico has
concluded bilateral air agreements are issued
in accordance with the provisions of these
agreements.

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Since the Mexican Government has fur-
nished no airway facilities nor meteorological
aids and has built only a few airports through-
out the Republic, most of the existing facilities
have been developed by the airlines with pri-
vate capital. The apathetic attitude of the
government toward such matters led to the
establishment in 1945 of the Aeronautical
Radio de Mexico, S.A. (ARMSA), a non-profit
company organized by the airlines to give radio
and weather service to all commercial and
private flyers. ARMSA purchased the sepa-
rately owned facilities and now operates and
maintains them, charging the individual air-
lines a rate proportionate to the amount each
uses the facilities. The failure of a number
of small, non-scheduled operators to pay this
company for its services has been largely re-
sponsible for its present indebtedness. For
reasons of safety, however, ARMSA has been
required by the government to give service to
all aircraft, whether the company has been
paid or not, and it has received no government
assistance in its efforts to collect from its
debtors.

In an effort to force Mexican and US airlines
to use Petroleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) aviation
fuel rather than to import US products, the
Mexican Government has repealed a 1939 de-
cree permitting tax-free importation of avia-
tion fuel for civil aviation. In spite of the
increased costs, however, the larger airlines are
continuing to import US 100-octane fuel,
since they claim PEMEX products to be of
inferior quality. Moreover, they lack faith
in the administration of PEMEX and question
the reliability of the company’s distribution of
aviation fuel to Mexican airports.

Among at least thirty private aeronautical
schools or aero club training units in Mexico,
the most important is the Escuela de Aviacion
Civil “Cinco de Mayo” at Puebla, which offers
courses in flight, navigation, meteorology,
radio navigation, and related fields. . Although
this school is supervised and managed directly
by the Department of Civil Aeronautics, it
has been provided with only meager funds
from the. government for the purchase of
flight and ground school training equipment
with which to carry on its program.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

In order to protect the interests of its air-
lines in both their domestic and international
operations, the Mexican Government has pur-
sued a very restrictive air traffic policy. In
negotiations with the US for a bilateral air
agreement, Mexico has insisted upon monop-
oly rights over certain routes and upon a regu-
lated division of traffic between US and Mexi-
can airlines over certain other routes. The
Mexican position reflects not only fear of the
technical and financial superiority of foreign
airlines (especially US airlines), against which
Mexican carriers believe they cannot eco-
nomically compete, but also the extreme sensi-
tivity of the Mexican Government to criticism
by nationalist groups. Since the Mexican de-
mands are inconsistent with the basic prin-
ciples of US aviation policy, the US has refused
to abandon the Bermuda pattern and has con-
sistently rejected any arrangement providing
for a regulated division of traffic.

Negotiations initiated by the UK and the
Netherlands have also been unsuccessful be-
cause of similar Mexican insistence upon split

seqres
Page-72
sagher 79

traffic arrangements. As a result, the only
Mexican bilateral air agreements now in effect
are a restrictive agreement concluded with
Portugal on 22 October 1948, and an agree-
ment signed with Cuba in June 1949.

b. International Organizations.

Mexico became a member of the Interna-
tional Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
upon its ratification of the Chicago Conven-
tion on 25 June 1946 and has taken an active
part-in most ICAO deliberations. The Mexi-
can role was decisive in the failure of the spe-
cial November 1947 Geneva meeting of an
ICAO commission convened to draw up a
multilateral agreement on commercial rights
in international air transport. Apparently
acting as the spokesman of the weaker civil
air nations at that meeting, Mexico presented
a resolution which brought out two conflict-
ing views: (1) the US, the UK, and other
major air nations sought a multilateral ex-
change of Fifth Freedom privileges in one in-
ternational agreement; and (2) Mexico, the
other Latin American nations present, and
certain other weak air nations supported the
Mexican resolution reserving to each country
the right to withhold Fifth Freedom privileges
in the negotiation of bilateral route agree-
ments supplementing the multilateral agree-
ment. (It had been decided that interna-
tional air routes should be subject to bilateral
negotiations.) The Mexican resolution was
accepted by a vote of 13-9, with five absten-
tions. Because of the sharp difference of
opinion, however, no compromise was possible
and there has been no subsequent attempt to
negotiate a multilateral agreement. Various
explanations have been advanced for the Mexi-
can delegation’s action at the Geneva confer-
ence. In any event, it appears that the po-
sition taken by the delegation was not ap-
proved in advance by the Mexican Govern-
ment. On the other hand, the Mexican pro-
posal at Geneva was clearly consistent with
the generally restrictive policy on air traffic
rights pursued by Mexico. Aerovias Guest is
a member of the International Air Transport
Association.

ec. US Technical Assistance,

From 1943 to 1947, a US Civil Aeronautics
Technical Mission composed of flight training

and aircraft maintenance specialists was as-
signed to Mexico to work with government of-
ficials in establishing the pilot training school
“Cinco de Mayo” at Puebla. This mission.
participated in training more than 300 Mexi-
can flight personnel, 60 percent of whom are
currently engaged in civil aviation activities,

4. Airlines.

a. Mexican Scheduled Airlines.

There are thirteen Mexican airlines operat-
ing scheduled services within the country and
to points abroad. In addition, about fifteen
non-Scheduled operators offer a variety of
charter services. Of the three leading Mexi-
can airlines, CMA, LAMSA, and Aeronaves,
CMA continues to hold its dominant po-
sition. CMA’s total weekly scheduled mile-
age makes up half of the Mexican total, is
more than four times that scheduled by any
other carrier, and twice the combined mileage
of its three nearest competitors.

Aerovias Guest and the two PAA affiliates,
CMA and Aeronaves, are reportedly the only
Mexican airlines to be operating at a profit.
Each of these, however, subsists principally
on its income from a single lucrative route:
Aerovias Guest, Mexico City-Madrid; CMA,
Mexico City-Los Angeles; and Aeronaves,
Mexico City-Acapulco (the popular Pacific
beach resort). All Mexican airlines have
been seriously affected by the general business
slump and the devaluation of the Mexican
peso. While passenger traffic has fallen off
15 percent since devaluation, operating costs
(equipment, fuel, and repairs, most of which
have to be paid for in dollars) have increased
20 percent. Freight traffic has increased
about 50 to 75 percent, but not sufficiently to
offset other losses. In the face of these con-
ditions, which mean the inevitable bankruptcy
of marginal operators, negotiations have been
proceeding to merge about eight of the smaller
airlines into a single organization, but no defi-
nite action has yet been taken.*

“In the consolidation of the smaller Mexican air-
lines which took place during the early part of 1950,
ATSA took over the operations of ALASA and Ja-
lisio. ATSA, which may change its name to Air
Mexico, will serve 27 cities and towns and conse-
quently will become one of the largest domestic car-
riers. It is reported also that GPA and Panini have
been merged with Reforma.

suffer
Page-73
80 : SE ofr

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF MEXICO
(October, 1949)
: Number
ar Unduplicated Scheduled .
Airline Route Miles |miles per Week of Aircraft Ownership
(Various Types)
60% Private
Aeronaves 1,876 34,250 8 40% U.S.
ATSA 1,383 8,298 9 62% Private
38% U.S.
Contreras 1,550 6,200 6 100% Private
. 63% Private
Aerovias Guest 5,756 23,024 5 37% U.S.
ALASA 959 6,702 1 100% U.S,
Reforma 3,120 32,086 5 100% Private
CMA 5,015 147,502 23 59% Private
41% U.S,
GPA 675 4,524 3 100% Private
LAMSA 1,573 29,948 6 100% U.S.
Panini 1,616 11,016 6 100% Private
Jalisco 203 1,624 8 100% Private
TAT 372, 5,874 6 100% Private
TAMSA 1,317 7,706 7 100% Private
TOTAL 25,415 318,754 93

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline.

(1) Aeronaves (Aeronaves de Mexico, S.A.).
Routes: The operations of Aeronaves are
confined entirely to the western part of Mexi-
co, except for one international stop at No-
gales, Arizona. Its services are divided into
two main types: (1) seasonal, high density
tourist traffic between Mexico City and the
Pacific resort, Acapulco; and (2) the rela-
tively unfluctuating traffic carried over routes
such as Mexico City-Nogales, and Mexico City-
Mazatlan-La Paz.
Equipment:
4 DC-3
3 DC-2%
1 Avro Anson
Aeronaves also owns a number of other air-
craft, mostly single engine types, which are

ORE Tr-1450

obsolete and not believed to be employed in
regular operations.
Ownership:
60 percent private Mexican
40 percent US (Pan American
World Airways)

Aeronaves was established in 1934 as a
wholly Mexican-owned organization. Pan
American acquired its 40 percent holding in
1940 and, as a result of certain contractual
relationships, elects two of the five members
of the Aeronaves Board of Directors who can
block any action of the Directors. Moreover,
purchase of equipment and certain other
transactions cannot be undertaken without
the consent of PAA, which therefore exer-

segs
Page-74
sugher 81

cises a considerable degree of effective con-
trol.

(2) ATSA (Aero-Transportes, S.A.).

Routes: ATSA operates only within Mexico,
except for a stop at Brownsville, Texas, which
is being served temporarily because of inade-
quate airfield facilities across the border at
Matamoros. The ATSA route network in-
cludes most of the important Mexican cities
between the US border and Mexico City.
These points are served on one north-south
and two east-west routes, interconnecting at
two junction points, Monterrey and San Luis
Potosi.

Equipment:

3 DC-3

3 Boeing 247-D

2 Stinson

1 Vultee Special V-1

Ownership:

62 percent private Mexican (9 in-
dividuals)

38 percent private US (2 individ-
uals)

ATSA was organized early in 1943 and
started operating early the following year.
Service has twice been interrupted for several
months by lack of flying equipment and finan-
cial difficulties.* .

(3) Contreras (Aerovias Contreras).

Routes: Contreras operates three routes
from Tijuana, on the US border. Two of
these serve Lower California: one extends the
full length of the peninsula to La Paz; the
other serves the Pacific resort of Ensenada.
The third route extends to Mexicali and San
Felipe, on the Mexican mainland.

Equipment:

3 DC-3
3 Avro Anson

Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.
Contreras was founded in 1947 by Mr. Manuel
Contreras, who is believed still to be the sole
owner of the airline.

(4) Aerovias Guest, S.A.

Routes: Aerovias Guest operates twice week-
ly service over just one route, Mexico City to
Madrid, with traffic stops at the Azores and
Lisbon and non-traffic stops at Miami and Ber-

 

* See note page 79.

muda. The company has applied to the US
Civil Aeronautics Board, however, for authori-
zation to operate a non-stop Mexico City-New
York service.
Equipment:
5 DC-4

(According to recent reports, two of these
aircraft are operated on Guest’s scheduled
service, two are held in reserve or for charter
service, and the fifth is temporarily leased to
a US non-scheduled carrier.)

Ownership:

63 percent private Mexican
37 percent private US

Aerovias Guest began operations to Spain
in January 1948 under a thirty-year license
from the Mexican Government. -Aerovias
Guest is a member of the International Air
Transport Association (IATA).

(5) ALASA (Aerovias Latino-Americanas,
S.A.).

Routes: ALASA operates local routes
throughout southeastern Mexico radiating
from Villahermoso, which is also connected
with Mexico City by a trunk route.

Equipment: 1 DC-3

ALASA also owns about 25 other aircraft of
at least 10 different types, all small and obso-
lete.

Ownership: Believed to be controlled by US
citizens; there is no Mexican Government par-
ticipation. Under several other names,
ALASA dates back to 1932.*

(6) Reforma (Aerovias Reforma, S.A.).

Routes: The only route now being operated
by Reforma connects Mexico City with the
west coast of Mexico and lower California
(Mexico City-Guadalajara-Culiacan-Guaymos-
Ensenada-Tijuana). Reforma also holds gov-
ernment concessions, however, for the opera-
tion of two other routes: Mexico City-Puebla
and Acapulco-Puebla-Tampico.

Equipment:

3 DC-3
2 C-47 (cargo only)
Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.

The founder (1945) and sole stockholder is Mr.
Alberto Rico Pani.*

 

* See note page 79.

segfler
Page-75
82 segesr

(7) CMA (Compania Mexicana de Aviacion,
S.A).

Routes: CMA serves most of the important
cities of Mexico, except Acapulco on the Pacific
coast and those in the interior north of Mexico
City. The CMA domestic route network con-
sists of: (1) trunk routes radiating from
Mexico City; and (2) feeder routes extending
from Monterrey and Mexico City to cities on
the Gulf coast, as far as Merida in the Yuca-
tan. CMA also operates two international
routes: Mexico City-Los Angeles and Mexico
City-Habana. CMA is the only airline of any
nationality serving these two routes directly.
Connections with the affiliated PAA system are
made on these routes at both Mexico City and
Merida for points in Central and South Amer-
ica and points in the US. CMA has also ap-
plied to the US Civil Aeronautics Board for au-
thorization to operate passenger and cargo
services to New Orleans and several Texas
ports of entry.

Equipment:
5 DC-4
15 DC-3
1 DC-2%
1 C-54 (cargo only)
1 C-47 (cargo only)

Ownership:
59 percent private Mexican
41 percent US (Pan American World
Airways)

CMA was founded in 1924 by two US na-
tionals to transport payrolls to the Tampico
oil fields. In 1929, Pan American purchased
the entire capital stock of the company, for
the purpose of gaining operating rights in
Mexico. PAA’s stock interest in CMA has
been progressively reduced in recent years to
55.6 percent in 1944, to 45 percent in 1946
(thus relinquishing control), and to its
present holding later that year.

(8) GPA (Golfo y Pacifico Aerotransportes,
S.A.).

Routes: GPA connects cities along the Gulf
of Mexico (from Gutierrez Zamora to Coatza-
coalcos) with Mexico City. It also connects
Coatzacoalcos with Salina Cruz on the Pacific
coast.

SE

Equipment:
1 Cessna C-78
2 Avro Anson
Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.
GPA was founded and started operating in
1945.*
(9) LAMSA (Lineas Aereas Mexicanas,
S.A.).

Routes: LAMSA operates north of Mexico
City in western Mexico, including a route ex-
tending from Mexico City to Ciudad Juarez
with a branch from Torreon to Mazatlan on
the Pacific coast, as well as a group of routes
in northwestern Mexico. LAMSA operates on
a temporary basis to Nogales, Arizona, because
of inadequate facilities on the Mexican side of
the border. No direct connections are made,
however, with LAMSA’s US parent company,
United Air Lines. LAMSA has also applied
for US authorization to provide service to Los
Angeles and several points in Texas.

Equipment: 6 DC-3

Ownership: LAMSA is the Mexican subsidi-
ary of the US scheduled airline, United Air
Lines, which holds 100 percent of LAMSA’s
preferred stock and 83.2 percent of its com-
mon stock. The remaining 16.8 percent of
common stock is held by other US interests.

(10) Panini (Servicio Aereo Panini, S.A.).

Routes: Panini serves the central and south-
ern parts of western Mexico, with Mexico City
as its eastern terminus. Although several of
Mexico’s large cities are included in the net-
work, the majority of points served are rela-
tively small towns with inadequate surface
transport facilities.

Equipment:

2 DC-3

2 Boeing 247-D

1 Avro Anson

1 Travelair (not used in
scheduled service)

Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.
Panini was founded in 1934 by Carlos Panini,
who is believed still to hold a controlling in-
terest.*

(11) Jalisco (Transportes Aereos de Ja-
lisco).

 

* See note page 79.

ET
Page-76
cugher 83

Routes: Jalisco serves a small section of west
central Mexico, from Guadalajara on the east
to Puerto Vallarta on the Pacific, thence south
to Tomatian. There is no appreciable surface
transport in this region.

Equipment:

3 DC-3

2 Ford Trimotor
2 Cessna C-78

1 Vuitee

Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.
Jalisco was founded in 1936.*
(12) TAT (Transportes Aereos de Tampico).
Routes: TAT provides local service between
Tampico and Mexico City and also connects
Tampico, the chief oil center of Mexico, with
the oil fields along the Gulf Coast. TAT is
also active as a charter operator along its
routes.
Equipment:
1 DC-3
5 Avro Anson

TAT also owns 5 other aircraft of 5 different
types, all small and obsolete.

Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.
TAT was founded in 1940.

(13) TAMSA (Transportes Aereos Mezi-
canos, S.A.).

Routes: TAMSA connects Mexico City with
the Gulf Coast, as far as Merida on the Yuca-
tan Peninsula, and also serves the more im-
portant towns on the Peninsula. In addition,

 

* See note page 79.

TAMSA operates a very short international
route, originating in Merida, from Chetumal
to Belize, British Honduras, where connections
are made with the TACA System to Central
America and with British West Indian Air-
ways for Caribbean points.
Equipment:
2 C-47 (cargo only)
5 Avro Anson

TAMSA also owns at least a dozen other air-
craft of various small and obsolete types.

Ownership: 100 percent private Mexican.
TAMSA was organized in 1943 succeeding a
carrier which had operated under various
other names since 1933.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Mexico is presently served by four foreign
scheduled airlines, of which three are US-
owned or controlled. American Airlines oper-
ates through-flights to Monterrey and Mexico
City via points in Texas, from the US west and
east coasts, and from Chicago. Pan American
World Airways (PAA) has a group of routes
which serve Tampico and Mexico City from
Texas gateways, continuing on (via Tapa-
chula, on some flights) to Guatemala and other
points in Central and South America.. PAA
also operates Miami-Habana-Merida and New
Orleans-Merida-Guatemala services. TACA
El Salvador, a US-controlled carrier, provides
service from Mexico City to Guatemala and
beyond, connecting with other TACA Airways
System services. The Cuban airline, Aerovias
“Q,” has recently begun operations over a
route from Habana to Merida and Vera Cruz.

secfer
Page-77
sper

APPENDIX O

NICARAGUA

1. Government Organization for Civil Ad-
ministration.

Civil and military aviation in Nicaragua are
both controlled directly by General Somoza,
Minister of War, Navy, and Aviation. There
appears to be no significant aviation organiza-
tion in the government other than an assistant
to Somoza who concerns himself with aviation
matters.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

A Law of Civil Aviation, passed in 1944, is
presumably still the controlling basic legisla-
tion for civil aviation, although it has been
supplemented by various presidential decrees.

b. Regulation of Nicaraguan Airlines.

The economy of Nicaragua is largely de-
pendent upon air transportation. Gold is one
of the country’s principal exports and air
transportation is almost the only link between
the isolated mining areas and the rest of the
country. Supplies, mining equipment, and
personnel are flown in to the mines, while gold
and personnel are transported on the return
trip.

In order to secure further control over civil
aviation, Somoza encouraged the formation in
1948 of a new Nicaraguan airline, FANSA.
This action was taken in the hope that the
airline would not only provide a source of con-
siderable income, but would also train pilots of
the Nicaraguan Air Force (FAN) and ensure
the availability of an air transport service on
which Somoza could depend in an emergency,
such as revolution or outside attack. As a
means of promoting FANSA, Somoza sus-
pended the operating permit of TACA de Nic-
aragua and forced the liquidation of its assets
by suddenly invoking a previously waived Nic-
araguan law requiring 55 percent of the stock
of domestic airlines to be held by Nicaraguan
nationals. TACA de Nicaragua was vulnera-
ble under this law, since it had at one time

\

been a wholly foreign-owned subsidiary of the
TACA System, and had more recently been
sold to private US and Honduran citizens,
This action by the Nicaraguan Government
was in effect an outright expropriation, be-
cause FANSA immediately took over TACA de
Nicaragua’s ground equipment and attempted
to operate its freight business. TACA’s three
DC-3 aircraft, however, escaped to Honduras.

The principal beneficiary of these develop-
ments has actually been Lineas Aereas de Nic-
aragua, S.A. (LA NICA), a Pan American
World Airways (PAA) affiliate in which PAA
owns a 40 percent interest. The mine owners
proved disinclined to do business with the obvi-
ously government-oriented FANSA, and LA
NICA has gradually secured most of the char-
ter freight traffic to the mines. Moreover, it
soon received TACA de Nicaragua’s mail con-
tract and took over all of the domestic sched-
uled traffic. Loss of two aircraft in crashes
early in 1949 has apparently brought FANSA
operations almost to a standstill and has forced
it to negotiate the sale to LA NICA of its re-
maining two aircraft. LA NICA, therefore, is
now the only scheduled airline in Nicaragua.

The preferential treatment accorded to LA
NICA at the same time FANSA was being un-
successfully promoted is attributable to the
20 percent share of its capital stock held by
the government. Somoza himself, moreover, is
reported to hold directly a substantial portion
of LA NICA’s privately owned shares. Even
as the principal air transport service now
available to Somoza, however, LA NICA re-
ceives no subsidy except that provided by its
mail contract with the government.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

The action taken by the government against
TACA de Nicaragua did not affect the opera-
tions of TACA, S.A. (TACA El Salvador) or
PAA, both of which operate international serv-
ices through Nicaragua.

sugfer 85
‘

Ig. blane 5
Page-78
86 : SEPRET

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

The Nicaraguan Government is financially
reluctant and technically unable to maintain
meteorological and navigational aids. PAA
operates Managua airport at its own expense
and the US Air Force maintains weather and
communications facilities there.

A now practically inactive Aero Club, organ-
ized in 1946, is also controlled by General
Somoza, but has received no government
assistance. There is therefore little or no
market in Nicaragua for civil aircraft.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Since no Nicaraguan-flag carrier operates
scheduled services outside the country, Nica-
ragua has had little occasion to develop an
international air traffic policy. It has not
raised any obstacles to the operation of foreign
airlines into Nicaragua. The Nicaraguan
Government has negotiated no bilateral air
transport agreements.

b. International Organizations.

Nicaragua was represented at the 1944 Chi-
cago Conference and became the first Latin
American member of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) by adhering to
the Chicago Convention on 28 December 1945.
Although Nicaraguan representatives have at-
tended ICAO meetings, they have not taken
an active part in the proceedings.

c. US Technical Assistance.

The airport at Managua was built and

equipped by the US under the wartime Air-
port Development Program.

4. Airlines.

a. Nicaraguan Scheduled Airlines.

LA NICA, the only scheduled airline in Nica-
ragua, was organized by PAA in 1945 to com-
pete with the TACA System’s subsidiary in that
country, TACA de Nicaragua. LA NICA grad-
ually expanded its services until, by 1947, it
operated 90 percent of the scheduled service in
the country. When TACA de Nicaragua was
expropriated in 1948, LA NICA became the only
scheduled Nicaraguan airline. It has experi-

enced only negligible competition from the
charter operations of FANSA and a recently
established non-scheduled carrier, INCA.

INCA Airlines Express Agency was organized
in Miami late in 1948 and was unexpectedly
designated by Nicaragua shortly thereafter as
its chosen instrument for Miami-Managua air
transport. Under the direction of an ex-PAA
pilot, W. E. Quick, who is President, majority
stockholder and Chief of Operations, INCA has
maintained twice weekly non-scheduled serv-
ice between Miami and Managua via Puerto
Cabezas. It also stops every other week on its
northbound trip at the Bonanza and Siuna
mining areas in the interior of Nicaragua.
Somoza appears to be promoting Quick in this
enterprise, which accounts for the political
favor enjoyed by the company at present.
INCA owns one DC-3, and leases another and
a C-46 when needed.

Lineas Aereas de Nicaragua, S.A. (LA NICA).

Unduplicated Miles Scheduled
Route Miles Per Week
849 6,738

Routes: LA NICA connects Managua with
towns along the eastern coast and with two
mining communities in the interior, Siuna and
Bonanza. One route extends east from
Managua to Bluefields and then north up the
eastern coast; the other extends from Mana-
gua northeast through the interior to the Car-
ibbean coast at the northern extremity of the
country.

Equipment:
4 DC-3
1 Boeing 247-D
Ownership:
40 percent US (PAA)
20 percent Government of Nicaragua
40 percent private Nicaraguan

b. Foreign Airlines.

Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, is served
on the Central American routes of both TACA,
S.A. (TACA El Salvador) and Pan American
World Airways (PAA). TACA provides service
to New Orleans and Mexico City, while PAA
also provides direct service to the US and con-
necting service throughout Latin America.

SEZRET
Page-79
sagker

APPENDIX P

PANAMA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion, |

Civil aviation in Panama is under the juris-
diction of the Ministry of Government and Jus-
tice, acting through a Department of Civil
Aeronautics. An earlier Department of Civil
Aeronautics functioned during 1948 under the
Ministry of Finance and Treasury, but was
eliminated for economy reasons and its re-
sponsibilities were transferred to an Inspector
General of Aviation under the Ministry of Gov-
ernment and Justice. This arrangement,
which required a Ministry to handle the civil
aviation function directly, apparently did not
work well, with the result that the Depart-
ment of Civil Aeronautics was re-established
within the Ministry of Government and Jus-
tice by Decree-Law 5 of 18 August 1949. A
National Civil Aeronautics Board was created
by this same decree to “study and resolve civil
and commercial aviation problems subject to
approval by the Executive Organ.”

2. Civil Aviation Legislation.

It is believed that civil aviation in Panama
is regulated in part by a decree of 1932, modi-
fied in 1947. Among other matters, this legis-
lation permits and regulates the registration
of foreign air carriers under the flag of Pana-
ma. When a particular case is not covered by
Panamanian civil aviation legislation, it is the
practice of the Panamanian Government to
apply a literal translation of US civil air regu-
lations. The National Civil Aeronautics
Board and the Department of Civil Aeronau-
tics are preparing a basic civil aviation law
designed to fit the special aviation situation
in Panama and to fall within the framework
of recommendations by the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO).

3. Civil Aviation Policy.
Because’ of Panama’s limited financial re-
sources and the general lack of aeronautical

knowledge on the part of most of its govern-
ment officials, civil aviation has not been
strongly supported or closely regulated by the
Government of Panama. For the most part,
civil aviation has been exploited for political
purposes by intensely nationalistic elements in
Panama. More recently, however, official at-
tention has been focused on the necessity of
formulating a general policy which will sup-
port all legislative and administrative action
that is needed to encourage the maximum use
of Panama’s new Tocumen National Airport.

The government does not grant any direct
subsidy to its only scheduled domestic airline,
Compania Panamena de Aviacion, S.A.
(COPA), which is a Pan American World Air-
ways affiliate. It has concluded a contract
with COPA, however, granting the latter an
exclusive franchise (for scheduled air services
in Panama and an indirect subsidy in the form
of certain tax exemptions, in return for free
transportation of Panamanian Government
officials. This contract also stipulates that 60
percent of the airline’s stock shall be controlled
by Panamanian nationals and that foreign
employees will not be hired unless qualified
Panamanians are not available.

Although Panama does not pursue a restric-
tive policy toward foreign airlines, there are
extreme nationalistic elements within the gov-
ernment and the country who have periodi-
cally submitted legislation designed to give
Panama rather strict control over the opera-
tions of foreign airlines. The government is
anxious, however, to induce the airlines of as
many countries as possible to use Panama’s
new Tocumen National Airport in order to
derive sufficient revenue to cover the cost of
its maintenance and operation. As a result
of the US-Panama bilateral air agreement
signed 31 March 1949, the operations of US
carriers were transferred from the US Air
Force Base, Albrook Field (which is in the

spire 87
‘
Page-80
88 - sagann

Canal Zone about one mile from Panama
City), to Tocumen Airport (which is in the
Republic, but more distant from the city).
All commercial airlines serving Panama now
operate into Tocumen.

Panama has few trained radio and meteor-
ological technicians and few qualified pilots
for commercial-type aircraft. Other than at
Tocumen Airport, ground facilities and radio
navigation aids are lacking or very inadequate.
Tocumen and the airports at David and Bocas
del Toro are currently being improved. Three
flight schools and four flying clubs continue
to offer a limited amount of private flying and
flight instruction.

Panama has Bermuda-type air agreements
with Peru (1947) and the US (1949). Ratifi-
cation of the US bilateral by the National
Assembly constituted an important victory for
the liberal forces within Panama and for im-
proved US-Panamanian relations, since the
agreement had been bitterly opposed by anti-
US nationalistic forces in Panama. Pro-
longed negotiations with the UK are expected
to terminate soon in signature of a bilateral
air agreement.

Panama has not joined the International
Civil Aviation Organization.

The US has built a number of military air
bases both in the Canal Zone and in the Re-
public of Panama for the protection of the
Panama Canal. In compliance with Panama’s
request (in a note accessory to the US-Panama
bilateral air agreement), a US Technical Civil
Aviation Mission has been assigned to Panama,
and several specialists are assisting and train-
ing Panamanian personnel in the operation of
Tocumen Airport as an international air
center.

4. Airlines.

a. Panamanian Scheduled Airlines.

Compania Panamena de Aviacion, S.A.
(COPA), the only airline presently operating
scheduled service within the Republic of Pan-
ama, was organized in 1944 by Pan American
World Airways (PAA), which retained 40 per-
cent of the stock. COPA commenced opera-
tions in 1947 over those interior routes which
had been served until then by PAA under its
Panamanian cabotage privileges.

Another important element in Panama's
civil aviation is Adams Enterprises in Spanish
America, S.A. (AESA), owned by John C. L.
Adams, a retired US Army Colonel. AESA
acts as a Central American representative for
various US manufacturers of aviation products
and arms. It has also contracted with the
Panamanian Government to operate both a
non-scheduled airline, Aviacion General, S.A.
(AGSA), and an aviation school for the train-
ing of Panama pilots and mechanics. AESA
has acquired all the properties of an amphib-
ian base and aviation school at Puerto Pilon.
It is building up these facilities, especially a
seaplane ramp, as well as operating the school,
and conducting thrice-weekly passenger and
cargo service to several points on the. Atlantic
side of the Isthmus, using Noordyn Norseman
seaplanes and Grumman Goose amphibians.
(A special summary of the TACA system js in-
cluded as Section 5.)

In October 1949, COPA was operating the
following route miles and miles scheduled per
week:

Unduplicated Miles Scheduled
Route Miles Per Week
522 4,108

COPA (Compania Panamena de Aviacion,
S.A.).

Routes: COPA serves the western half of
Panama with a triangular route extending
from Panama City, the capital, southwest to
David and Puerto Armuelles, on the Pacific
coast, then north across Panama to Chan-
guinola on the Atlantic side. The route then
extends east through Bocas del Toro back to
Panama City.

Equipment: 2 DC-3.

Ownership:

67 percent private Panamanian
33 percent US (PAA)

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Panama is the hub of an extensive network
of international scheduled airline services ex-
tending throughout Central and South Amer-
ica, as well as to the US and to Europe. Air-
craft of seven foreign airlines, representing
four nationalities, regularly serve Panama
City. Four of these are US-flag carriers: Pan
American World Airways (PAA), PANAGRA,

snofer
Page-81
segher 89

Braniff International Airways, and Uraba, Me-
dellin and Central (UMCA). Two others,
British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC),
and Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM), are Euro-
pean and the seventh is the Colombian-flag
affiliate of the PAA System, AVIANCA. The
routes operated by these carriers which serve
Panama City are indicated below:

Airline Routes from:

PAA- US via Central America to Pan-
ama; US via Jamaica to Pana-
ma; US to Panama (non-stop);
and Trinidad via north coast of
South America to Panama.

PANAGRA Panama via west coast of South
America to Chile and Argen-
tina.

Braniff US via Cuba to Panama and
west coast of South America.

UMCA Panama to Colombia.

BOAC Europe and US via Bermuda
and Jamaica to Panama and
west coast of South America.

KLM Europe and Caribbean area to
Panama and Costa Rica.

AVIANCA Colombia to Panama.

In addition to the foregoing operations
through Panama City, service to David, Pan-
ama is maintained by PAA en route from San
Jose to Panama City. Moreover, two other
foreign airlines, both Costa Rican, provide
service to points in Panama. The operations
of TACA de Costa Rica include Panama's
northeastern border town of Bocas del Toro;
LACSA’s only international service crosses
Panama’s northern border to the Pacific town
of Puerto Armuelles.

c. Foreign Non-Scheduled Operations.

Transocean Air Lines, a US irregular air
carrier, has operated frequent flights to Tocu-
men Airport and is negotiating a contract with
the Panamanian Government permitting un-
limited operations on a charter basis.

5. The TACA System.

A study of the TACA System is inserted at
this point because TACA Airways, S.A., the

non-operating US-controlled holding company
for this group of airlines, is incorporated in
Panama.

The TACA System grew out of charter oper-
ations started in 1931 in Honduras by Mr.
Lowell Yerex, a New Zealander, under the com-
pany name Transportes Aereos Centroameri-
canos, S.A. (TACA de Honduras). Operations
were confined to that country until 1934, when
the company began its expansion throughout
Central and South America chiefly by means
of the purchase or organization of other local
lines. TACA de Honduras remained the prin-
cipal company of the system until 1939, when
TAGA Airways, S.A. was founded as the non-
operating holding company for the operating
subsidiaries, .

The TACA System reached its maximum size
about 1947. Since that time, however, it has
been contracted considerably, mostly by the
sale of component companies.

The following companies make up the
present system:

(1) TACA Airways, S.A.

This company is the non-operating holding
company of this group of airlines. It was
established in Panama in 1939 as. TACA, S.A.,
changed its name in 1943 to Inter-American
Airways, S.A., and later in that year adopted
the present name.

(2) TACA, S.A. (TACA El Salvador ).

This company was established in 1939 in El
Salvador to operate the international routes
of the TACA System in Central America, which
had previously been operated by TACA de Hon-
duras. TACA El Salvador has continued in
this role and has expanded its operations to
the US and Mexico. In May 1948, TACA El
Salvador signed an agreement with TACA de
Honduras to have the latter operate the Cen-
tval American international routes. These
operations are still conducted, however, under
the name of TACA El Salvador.

(3) Linea Aerea TACA de Venezuela, C.A.
(TACA de Venezuela).

This company was established as an affiliate
of TACA Airways in August 1944. At present,
it is the only TACA-affiliated airline operating
in South America.

sufher
Page-82
90

(4) TACA de Mexico, S.A. (TACA de Mex-
ico).

This company was established in Mexico in
1944 as a non-operating subsidiary of TACA
Airways to comply with the terms of the per-
mit issued by the Mexican Government to
TACA El Salvador to operate into Mexico.
(The permit required the establishment of a
Mexican company to own the TACA System’s
ground facilities and real estate in Mexico.)

(5) TACA Airways Agency, Inc.

This company was established in the US in
1943 for the purpose of handling business in
the US for the TACA System.

(6) TACA Airlines Investing Corporation.

This company was incorporated in the US
in 1946 as an inactive subsidiary of the Sys-
tem. It owns one-half of the TACA System
interest in TACA de Colombia.

The chart below indicates the relationship
between the present components of the TACA
System and the percentage of the stock of
each component which is held by the Panama
holding company, TACA Airways, SA.

The following companies were at various
times affiliated with the TACA System, but
have since been sold to other interests or have
discontinued operations:

British West Indian Airways (BWIA), which
Mr. Yerex had organized outside the TACA
System in 1940, became a part of the System
in 1943, when Yerex turned over his 40 percent
stock interest in BWIA to TACA Airways. By
1947, TACA Airways had sold all of this stock
to British interests.

SEYRET

.

Aerovias Brasil, which Yerex had founded in
1942, was sold to Brazilians in 1947.

TACA de Colombia was established as a
TACA Airways affiliate in 1944 but discon-
tinued operations in July 1947 because of
financial difficulties.

The original company, TACA de Honduras,
along with TACA de Nicaragua, was sold to
Central American interests in February 1948.
TACA de Nicaragua is no longer in operation.

TACA de Costa Rica was sold to Central
American interests in May 1948.

The founder of the TACA System, Lowell
Yerex, was originally its principal owner.
However, in 1943, US investors acquired a 46.2
interest in TACA Airways, S.A., and ‘subse-
quent capital increases in 1946 raised this per-
centage to 62.4 percent. A voting trust agree-
ment was signed in 1947 by the following
TACA stockholders: Mr. Yerex, The Pennroad
Corporation, Transcontinental and Western
Air, Inc. (TWA), and the Waterman Steam-
ship Corporation. Under this agreement,
which provided that Waterman was to exercise
the voting privileges of the other parties until
15 July 1949, Waterman apparently acquired ~
effective control of the TACA System. It is
not known, however, whether the voting trust
agreement has been renewed.

Although the exact percentage of total out-
standing stock which US interests presently
own is not known, it is believed to be about
75 percent.

 

 

TACA Airways, S.A.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Central America Mexico US South America
98 TACA El TACA de TACA Airways TACA de 45
% Salvador 95% Mexico 100% Agency, Inc. Venezuela %
TACA Airlines
100% Investing Corp.
ORE Tr-1550

Ss eae r
Page-83
seger

APPENDIX Q

PARAGUAY

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Paraguay’s limited civil aviation activity is
administered by the Ministry of National De-
fense, acting through a Directory of Aerial
Traffic (Direccion de Trafico Aero). The lat-
ter agency was recently removed from the
jurisdiction of the Commander of the Air
Force, with the result that civilian control over
commercial aviation has been increased.
Military and civil aviation functions are now
theoretically separated, although there is still

- considerable overlapping. The effectiveness
of the “Direccion” in developing civil aviation
in Paraguay is still seriously restricted by its
lack of greater autonomy and sufficient re-
sources.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

There is very little legislation in Paraguay
affecting civil aviation. No information is
available on civil air regulations currently in
effect. Linea Aerea de Transporte Nacional
(LATN), the national airline, was established
by Decree No. 4464 of 12 July 1944. A second
Decree, No. 7151, adopted 6 February 1945,
established operating regulations for LATN
and also granted the airline a monopoly on
domestic air transportation.

bv. Regulation of Paraguayan Airlines.

Progress in civil aviation, which is at a very
primitive level in Paraguay, has been retarded
by political instability, lack of interest, and
insufficient funds. Implementation and en-
forcement of civil air regulations have been
lax, and frequent changes of administration
have interrupted the establishment of a con-
sistent aviation policy.

Paraguay is a fertile field for the develop-
ment of air transport, since it has a limited
highway system, and rail service is main-
tained only in the southern part of the country

(one rail line from Asuncion southeast to the
Argentine border). River transportation and
fair-weather roads must be depended on for
most transport requirements. Although Par-
aguayan legislation grants LATN a monopoly
of domestic commercial air service, the gov-
ernment also gave tacit approval to the estab-
lishment of a limited charter service by US
interests during 1948. -LATN has protested
this service, but the government now seems
determined to encourage any form of aviation
activity.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

It is Paraguayan policy to encourage inter-
national carriers to serve the country, but the
traffic potential is too low to attract many
foreign operators. No US carrier serves
Asuncion, the capital, at the present time.
Although an application by Braniff Interna-
tional Airways to serve Asuncion en route to
Buenos Aires is being given priority attention
by the “Direccion,” it is unlikely that Braniff
will inaugurate service to Paraguay until Ar-
gentina authorizes extension of the route to
Buenos Aires.* Commercial airline travel to
Asuncion is now possible only via Argentine or
Brazilian airlines.

Cabotage traffic is reserved to Paraguayan
enterprises. .

ad. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

The excellent runway at the Asuncion air-
port was built by the US under the wartime
Airport Development Program. Development
and improvement of other fields (none of
which is surfaced) has increased the number
of points served by the national air service.

Recent aviation policy has encouraged pri-
vate flying and the reorganization of the Aero
Club del Paraguay (ACP). Reactivation of
this club, equipped with its own aircraft, and

 

“ Branift inaugurated Lima-La Paz-Asuncion-
Buenos Aires service during June 1950.

sefher 91
\
Page-84
92 o secher

the development of a small grass field near the
capital for the use of private aircraft have
tended to reduce civilian dependence on the
air force for the latter’s aircraft, personnel,
and flying facilities.

There is no airframe or aircraft engine in-
dustry in Paraguay.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Paraguay encourages foreign airlines to
serve the country. Since its carrier does not
operate outside the country, Paraguay has no
competitive reason for desiring to restrict the
operations of foreign carriers.

Paraguay concluded a Bermuda-type bilat-
eral air transport agreement with the US in
February 1947,

b. International Organizations.

Paraguay is a member of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Its abil-
ity to participate actively in ICAO activities,
however, is very limited, and failure to meet its
financial obligations to the organization has
resulted in suspension of its voting rights.
Paraguay has not been represented at all ICAO
functions.

ce. US Technical Assistance.

No CAA Mission has been assigned to Para-
guay. As indicated in Section 2, however, the
Asuncion airport was developed with US assist-
ance.

4. Airlines.

a, Paraguayan Airlines.

LATN, the national airline, is operated by
the air force and handles most of the commer-
cial air service within Paraguay. Both mili-
tary and non-military transports, and even
training planes on occasion, are used in
commercial services. LATN was organized
primarily to provide fast transportation to out-
lying Army posts. Since its schedules are kept
at a minimum, LATN’s commercial service is
mainly on a charter basis.

Two US ex-servicemen have established a
domestic air charter service in Paraguay, using
two Cessna 170’s. The government, under
pressure from LATN, however, may force a sus-
pension of this service.

Several approaches have been made to the
Paraguayan Government by various foreign
interests for authorization to establish an in-
ternational air service based in Paraguay.
Various grandiose proposals for operations to
Europe and the US, involving both Argentine
and US interests, have been advanced, but
such operations are not likely to materialize
for some time, if at all.

Data concerning LATN (Linea Aerea de
Transporte Nacional) as of 10 October 1949
are summarized below: .

Unduplicated = Miles Scheduled
Route Miles Per Week
LATN 2,169 3,737

Routes: LATN connects Asuncion with out-
lying towns in Paraguay through four routes
known as: (1) Northwestern; (2) Northeast-
ern; (3) Eastern; and (4) Southeastern.

Equipment:

2 Stinson Voyager
4 Stinson Reliant
2 Republic Seabee

Ownership:

100 percent Government of Para-
guay.

b. Foreign Airlines.

The capital of Paraguay, Asuncion, is served
by two international carriers.* Panair do
Brasil operates one, route west from Rio de
Janeiro and Sao Paulo via Curitiba and
Iguassu Falls to Asuncion, and a second route
south from Campo Grande to Asuncion.
ALFA, the Argentine carrier, provides service
to the city on two routes from northern Argen-
tina.

 

“A third carrier, Braniff International Airways,
now serves Asuncion (see note page 91).

sedeen
Page-85
.

sechar

APPENDIX R

PERU

1, Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion.

Civil aviation in Peru is the responsibility
of a Ministry of Aeronautics acting through
a_ Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGAC). The DGAC is charged with admin-
istration of civil aviation policy and regulation
of civil aviation activity. The Corporacion
Peruana de Aeropuertos y Aviacion Commer-
cial (CORPAC), a government-controlled avi-
ation corporation, is responsible for implemen-
tation and administration of DGAC regula-
tions relating to the construction and opera-
tion of airports and air communications facili-
ties. A General Directorate of Meteorology
established in June 1949 replaced the National
Meteorological Service as a direct dependency
of the Ministry of Aeronautics. A Civil Aero-
nautics Advisory Committee was created in
1946 to study aviation policy and act as an
advisory board to the Minister of Aeronautics.
This committee is composed of the Legal
Director in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
the Chief of Staff of the Peruvian Air Force,
the Minister of Aeronautics, the Director of
Civil Aviation, the President of CORPAC, and
the President of the Peruvian Tourist Board.

An almost complete lack of properly trained
administrative, flight, and technical person-
nel in Peru, other than those employed by

the civil airlines, has necessitated a depend-
ence on military personnel for staffing all civil
aviation regulatory bodies. With the coming
into power of the Military Junta in late Octo-
ber 1948, moreover, all phases of civil aviation
fell under stricter military control. This in-
fluence, however, has not been exerted to favor
military aviation requirements over commer-
cial ones. .

Lines of responsibility for the foregoing
functional groups have been established ap-
proximately as in the chart below.

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

A few of the most important laws, decrees,
or resolutions dealing with civil aviation are
listed below.

(1) Decree No. 27 of 31 October 1945
charged the DGAC with responsibility for the
inspection of all civil aeronautical equipment,
including that of commercial aviation com-
panies,

(2) A decree of 15 May 1946 required all
commercial air navigation companies to use
multi-engine aircraft in the transport of pas-
sengers, freight and mail, except when inade-
quate ground facilities require the use of
smaller aircraft.

 

Civil Aeronautics
Advisory Committee

 

 

 

 

 

Ministry of Aeronautics

 

 

 

 

I |

 

Directorate General
of Civil Aeronautics
(Several Divisions)

 

Corporation

 

 

 

Peruvian Air Facilities
CORPAC
(Several Divisions)

 

Directorate General Military
of Meteorology Air

 

 

 

 

 

SE

ORE Tr-1650

ET 93
Page-86
94 sufaur

(3) Decree No. 29 of 30 June 1946 reorgan-
ized CORPAC, granting it additional author-
ity and funds with which to carry out its
functions.

(4) Decree No. 31 of 30 June 1946 created
the Civil Aeronautics Advisory Committee.

(5) Decree No. 33 of 17 July 1946 directed
that the legal obligation of companies operat-
ing air services to employ Peruvian nationals
as 80 percent of their employees (Law 7505 of 8
April 1932) shall be carried out progressively
until fulfilled or until all qualified Peruvian
nationals are so employed.

(6) Decree No. 27 of 12 July 1947 estab-
lished the requirements for concession of oper-
ating permits to national and international
airlines.

(7) Resolution No. 704 of 23 November 1948
cancelled all cabotage rights in Peru of the
US airline, PANAGRA, as of 1 January 1949.

(8) Resolution No. 389 of 3 May 1949 ap-
proved the “Rules of the Air” drawn up in
accordance with the standards recommended
by the International Civil Aviation Organiza-
tion (ICAO).

bv. Regulation of Peruvian Airlines.

Peruvian policy favors majority control of
Peruvian airlines by nationals of the country.
The operating contract of the ill-fated Peru-
vian International Airways, for example, re-
quired majority contro] of that company by
Peruvians within 10 years of its establishment.
Moreover, it is required by law that 80 per-
cent of the employees of each airline be Peru-
vian nationals.

Except for the services rendered by the Mili-
tary Air Transport Service (TAM), the Peru-
vian Government has not participated in the
operation of air services. Until recently,
therefore, it appeared that Peruvian policy
endorsed private initiative for the develop-
ment of air services. The present military
regime, however, is promoting TAM as a com-
mercial airline in an apparent effort to com-
pete directly with Peruvian civil airlines. Al-
though the government ostensibly favors rea-
sonable competition in the airline industry, it
has followed certain discriminatory procedures
in its efforts to draw additional traffic to TAM.
Moreover, despite the serious setback of a re-
cent accident, TAM still appears to retain am-

bitious plans for further expansion. The
Peruvian Government’s policy of favoring
TAM, however, may adversely affect the devel-
opment of the country’s civil aviation, since it
is probable that TAM does not have the neces-
sary skill and experience for operating a de-
pendable commercial airline.

The Peruvian Government has on occasion
granted subsidies to civil airlines on a very
limited scale. The Compania de Aviacion
Faucett is reported to have received a small
subsidy at one time, for example, but it now
has only a contract for the carriage of mail.
ANDES, formerly a scheduled domestic carrier,
received a small allotment in September 1949
for the purpose of reorganizing on a sounder
economic basis as a non-scheduled operator for
domestic and international services.

In spite of Faucett’s 20 years of service ex-
clusively within the country, the present gov-
ernment does not consider this carrier a
genuine Peruvian enterprise, principally be-
cause PANAGRA controls 25 percent of its
stock. However, Faucett still retains influ-
ence with the government because its services,
although admittedly inferior to the cabotage
services formerly provided by PANAGRA, are
of great value to the country and could not.
now be duplicated by any other Peruvian
organization.

In order to promote existing airlines, espe-
cially TAM, the government discourages the
establishment of additional scheduled or non-
scheduled services within the country.

c. Regulation of. Foreign Airlines.

Peru was the most recent Latin American
country to withdraw cabotage privileges for
foreign airlines. PANAGRA lost these privi-
leges as of 1 January 1949.

Foreign airlines must secure permits for the
operation of services to Peru from the DGAC.
Such services are subject to the terms of bilat-
eral air agreements negotiated between Peru
and those countries whose airlines fly to Peru.

Foreign non-scheduled flights to Peru must
receive prior authorization, requests for which
must be made to the DGAC at least five days
in advance of expected entry. Peru is not
known to have put any obstacles in the way
of such approval.

sears
Page-87
sugar 95

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Peruvian policy with respect to the develop-
ment, improvement, and operation of air facili-
ties is executed by the Ministry of Aeronautics
through the government airport corporation,
CORPAC. To the limited extent permitted by
the funds which have been made available to
it, CORPAC has attempted to bring all con-
struction, maintenance, and operation of air-
ports, radio aids to navigation, and communi-
cations facilities under its control. For the
most part, its funds have been spent on devel-
oping and operating the Limatambo Airport
(large, modern airport and buildings outside
Lima) and in purchasing communications and
other facilities throughout the country from
the commercial airlines, which originally in-
stalled and operated such facilities for their
own purposes. CORPAC has been criticized,
however, for failing to expend funds or effort to
improve the communications, radio navigation
aids and airports at the secondary air centers
of the country. Although airline operators
have found CORPAC services expensive and
their charges sometimes discriminatory, it is
generally agreed that this system is less costly
than duplicate operations by individual car-
riers. Moreover, more efficient administration
of CORPAC might lessen the charges and im-
prove the services.

CORPAC’s principal current difficulty has
been the continued failure of the government
to contribute sufficient funds for the corpora-
tion to perform adequately its duties. As a
result, CORPAC’s administration has recently
become disorganized, its services have deteri-
orated, the President of the corporation has
resigned, and plans have been advanced for a
return of its facilities to private operations.
In September 1949, however, funds finally ap-
peared to be forthcoming to enable CORPAC
to continue at a fair level of efficiency.

CORPAC plans eventually to convert the
present aircraft communications network to
radio-telephone. The new service would con-
sist of two networks, one serving northern Peru
and the other serving southern Peru.

Prior to the October 1948 coup, the govern-
ment granted small subsidies to aero clubs and
was about to inaugurate a broader program to
encourage private flying. The present gov-

ernment, however, has not revived these plans.
Strict controls on imports of aviation prod-
ucts, as a result of Peru’s acute shortage of
foreign exchange, make it unlikely that pri-
vate flying will receive any substantial stimu-
lus in the near future.

There is no airframe or aircraft manufac-
ture in Peru at present. Until 1946, however,
aircraft manufacturing was an important
phase of the Faucett Aviation Company busi-
ness. Faucett developed in 1934 a Stinson-
Reliant type of single-engine plane particu-
larly suitable for operation into the rough
Peruvian airports and capable of climbing over
the Andes. About thirty of these aircraft were
completed by 1946. Production was discon-
tinued at that time, partly because the planes
were becoming obsolescent and also because of
the government decree requiring commercial
airline companies operating in Peru to use.
multi-engine aircraft on all routes except
those with landing fields not suitable for such
larger aircraft.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

With one major exception, basic Peruvian
international aviation policies have closely
paralleled those of the US, including strong
support of Fifth Freedom rights, the early
execution of a multilateral air transport agree-
ment, and the standardization of regulations
and practices through representation in and
adherence to the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). Since the Bermuda-
type bilateral air agreement was concluded
with the US on 27 December 1946, Peru has
negotiated agreements with Cuba, Panama,
Chile, the UK, and the Netherlands.

The sole major instance of divergence of civil
aviation policy between the US and Peru was
primarily concerned with conflicting interpre-
tation of the US-Peru bilateral agreement.
During the summer and fall of 1948, lengthy
consultation between officials of Peru and the
US took place as a result of Peru’s attempts
to impose frequency limitations on US car-
riers flying through Peru on the west coast
routes. These talks were held in an effort to
reconcile divergent US and Peruvian views on
the amount of service which should be allowed
on those routes under the agreement.

sugftsr
a
Page-88
96 : SEC

Probably as a result of pressure exerted by
the newly organized Peruvian International
Airways (PIA), which was faced with the com-
petition of two experienced and heavily backed
US airlines, the Peruvian Government can-
celed the license authorizing Braniff Airways
(a designated US carrier under the bilateral
agreement) to operate into Peru, just as Bran-
iff initiated service in June 1948.

However, intervention of the US Govern-
ment resulted in 'the Peruvian Government's
agreement to reinstate the Braniff permit,
pending consultation as provided for in the
bilateral agreement. The US took a serious
view of the entire situation, inasmuch as any
outcome unfavorable to the US interpretation
of the bilateral agreement would have estab-
lished a precedent jeopardizing the numerous
similar agreements concluded by the US
throughout the world. The revolution which
unseated the Peruvian Government in October
1948, however, ended all discussions on the
subject of the bilateral agreement. Since PIA
terminated its operations in February 1949,
the new Peruvian Government has not re-
opened the subject.

c. US Technical Assistance.

A US Civil Aeronautics Mission has been
functioning in Peru since February 1946 on
the basis of notes exchanged on 27 December
1946 between Peru and the US. Specialists in
the fields of air traffic control, airport engi-
neering, meteorology, communications, carto-
graphic engineering, and air safety have been
assigned to the mission at various times. The
mission has: (1) aided in the compilation and
issuance of modern air traffic rules; (2) sur-
veyed and made recommendations on air traf-
fic control, airports, and air navigation aids;
and (3) studied and made recommendations
for the reorganization of civil aviation in Peru.
Since the Military Junta took over in October
1948, efforts of the mission to stimulate the
reorganization and coordination of civil avia-
tion activities and functions in Peru have been
fruitless. Having abandoned its efforts in this
direction, the mission has concentrated during
1949 on aiding CORPAC in the improvement
of its services. A meteorological survey has
also been conducted by a US technical spe-
cialist, and a study of air transport tariffs with

T
.

respect to rising costs of operation leq to
recommendation by the mission of a 25 percent
increase in traffic rates. Moreover, a modern
6,000 ft. airstrip with radio and ground facili-
ties, which was built by the US at Iquitos,
Peru, during the war to expedite the move-
ment of rubber from the upper Amazon, has
now been turned over to the Peruvian Gov-
ernment.

4. Airlines.
a. Peruvian Scheduled Airlines.

At present, there are only two operators pro-
viding scheduled domestic airline service in
Peru: Compania de Aviacion Faucett (Fau-
cett) and Transportes Aereos Militares (TAM).
Faucett is a privately owned enterprise, while
TAM is operated by the Peruvian Air Force.
A third carrier, Aerovias Nacionales del Sur
(ANDES), formerly operated scheduled serv-
ices within Peru. Because of financial diffi-
culties, however, ANDES sought and obtained
permission in August 1949 to operate domestic
and international non-scheduled services for
passengers and freight, using C-46 aircraft.
The Lima-Caracas (Venezuela) route, inaugu-
rated 1 September 1949 by ANDES on an ir- *
regular basis, offers a promising traffic poten-
tial, largely because of the direct connections
from Caracas to points in the US and Europe.

Compania de Aviacion Faucett was estab-
lished in 1928 by Elmer J. Faucett, an Ameri-
can who had been barnstorming for about five
years up and down the northwestern coast of
South America and across the Andes. Al-
though the present regime in Peru is not as
favorable to Faucett as previous governments
have been. the company still enjoys considera-
ble influence in Peruvian aviation circles. It
has earned a profit regularly and has experi-
enced little difficulty in generating additional
traffic for its new, larger aircraft.

TAM was authorized to put its service on a
scheduled basis in January 1949. The govern-
ment’s desire to extend TAM’s service was
probably largely responsible for cancellation of
PANAGRA’s cabotage privileges, also in Janu-
ary 1949. TAM and Faucett now share the
former PANAGRA traffic. In order to cover
the routes it attempts to serve, TAM has sub-
jected its equipment to intensive utilization,

sufeee
:
Page-89
sph ET 97

to the serious detriment of both the safety and
efficiency of its operations. As its service ex-
pands under government sponsorship, TAM
will probably encroach upon Faucett’s traffic,
in spite of the fact that TAM has been required
to increase its commercial rates to a level only
slightly below that of Faucett. Elimination
of ANDES from the domestic scheduled service
competition, moreover, improves the competi-
tive prospects for both Faucett and TAM.

Peruvian International Airways (PIA),
Peru’s former chosen instrument for interna-
tional air service, operated to the east coast of
the US until early in 1949. This carrier
opened service to Habana in May 1947 and, in
accordance with the US-Peru bilateral agree-
ment, extended its service in July 1947 to New
York via Miami and Washington. Intense
competition from two US carriers over routes
partially paralleling those of PIA, in addition
to insufficient capital support and unsound
commercial airline practices, was responsible
for the serious financial difficulties which
forced PIA to discontinue services and declare
bankruptcy in February 1949.

(1) Faucett (Compania de Aviacion Fau-
ceti, S.A.).

Routes: Faucett’s routes are domestic only,
connecting Lima with all important cities in
Peru. In addition to coastal routes extending
to the Ecuadoran border in the north and the
Chilean border in the south, Faucett’s exten-
sive trans-Andes routes connect the developed
coastal strip with a number of the most im-

portant points throughout the relatively unde-
veloped eastern portion of Peru (including
Iquitos, Cajamarca, and Pias in the north,
Tingo Maria in central Peru, and Puerto Mal-
donado, Cuzco, and Iberia in the south).
Equipment:
2 DC-4
7 DC-3
7 Stinson-Faucett F-19
Ownership: Faucett is a closely held com-
pany and details concerning its ownership are
obscure. Although Mr. Elmer J. Faucett, who
founded and has always directed the airline,
has probably never held a controlling interest,
it is believed that majority stock control is held
by private Peruvian citizens. The US airline,
PANAGRA, through a wholly owned, non-
operating Peruvian airline, probably holds an
approximately 25 percent minority interest.
A Spanish resident of Peru also holds a minor-
ity interest.
Faucett was organized and began operations
in 1928.
(2) TAM (Transportes Aereos Militares).
Routes: TAM is the air transport component,
of the Peruvian Air Force and has operated
commercially principally on a space-available
basis. As a result of its primarily military
nature, most of its operations are non-sched-
uled and its scheduled operations are on an
informal basis. TAM operates extensively in
southern Peru and has four scheduled services
over two routes from Iquitos: to Yurimaguas,
and to San Ramon, a military base, via Pu-
callpa.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF PERU
( October, 1949 )
Number
eh Unduplicated Scheduled . oO hi
Airline Route Miles* |Miles Per Week| or aireratt _
(Various Types)
Faucett 3,904 37,983 16 Obscure
TAM 2,588 10,152 7 100% Gov.
TOTAL 6,492 48,135 23

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline.

ORE Tr-1750
Page-90
98 sole RET

Equipment: 7 DC-3

Ownership: 100 percent Peruvian Govern-
ment (Peruvian Air Force).

This airline has been operated by the Air
Force since 1946, after having been established
by the Peruvian Navy in 1927 and later oper-
ated as a civil airline.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

International service to Peru is maintained
by four foreign airlines. The US carrier,
Braniff Airways, stops at Lima on its route
from the US to Rio de Janeiro via Habana,

Panama, Guayaquil and La Paz. Asecond US
airline, PANAGRA, provides non-stop service
from Panama to Lima en route to La Paz, San-
tiago and Buenos Aires. PANAGRA also
serves the Peruvian cities of Talara, Chiclayo
and Arequipa on various other international
routes. British Overseas Airways Corporation
(BOAC) transits Lima on its Barranquilla-
Santiago trunk route, and the Brazilian car-
rier, Panair do Brasil, maintains service up the
Amazon from Manaus (Brazil) to Pebas and
Iquitos in the northeastern corner of Peru.

SEGRET
Page-91
sefhar

99

APPENDIX S

URUG

1
tion. |

Administration of Uruguay’s civil aviation
is the responsibility of a Directorate of Civil
Aeronautics (DAC), acting under the juris-
diction of the Ministry of National Defense.
The DAC supervises the national airline,
PLUNA, as well as all other commercial avia-
tion activity, air facilities, and aero clubs.
The government agencies concerned with avi-
ation in Uruguay are organized as shown on
the chart below.

2.

Government Organization for Civil Avia-

Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

A commission composed of representatives
of civil and military aviation was appointed
by the government late in September 1949 to
draft legislation for the development of avia-
tion in Uruguay, but little information is
available on Uruguay’s current basic aviation
legislation. The country’s principal domes-
tic airline, PLUNA, was reorganized in 1945
on the basis of an organic law of 1944 setting
it up as a mixed company, including both
government and private capital. While this
law authorized the acquisition of private
shares by the State, it did not encompass
the final organization of the company as an
autonomous entity of the Uruguayan Govern-

UAY

ment. PLUNA, however, is now wholly gov-
ernment-owned and new legislation has been
drafted to provide for its changed status.
A law of 5 December 1940 (No. 9977) fixes
the yearly subsidies paid by the Government
to aero clubs.

b. Regulation of Uruguayan Airlines.

Since 1943, the DAC has gradually assumed
more direct control of civil aviation activity
within Uruguay. Because of the country’s
small area, the concentration of population
in one urban area, and its adequate railway
network, there has been little incentive either
in private or in governmental circles for the
establishment of a more extensive air trans-
port network. Present Uruguayan civil avi-
ation policy appears to have the aim of pro-
viding adequate air service by whatever means
are most convenient. Repeated overtures
have been made by the government to induce
the privately owned Uruguayan scheduled
carrier, CAUSA, which has had a record of
successful operations on its short interna-
tional routes, to merge with PLUNA, which
for a long time has been considered an in-
efficiently managed and poorly organized
enterprise. Although CAUSA has consist-
ently resisted such ‘a merger, the DAC con-

 

 

Ministry of National Defense

 

 

]

 

Directorate of Civil Aeronautics

 

 

Directorate of Military Aeronautics

 

 

 

Operations Legal Affairs

 

 

 

Administration PLUNA

 

 

 

 

 

 

s

ORE Tr-1850

RET
Page-92
100 : segher

tinues to subsidize CAUSA and to countenance
its private ownership, in order to ensure
continuation of its valuable services between
Montevideo and Buenos Aires. Under the
government’s reorganization plans, PLUNA
is designated as the eventual instrument for
the operation of all internal services and for
routes to Rio de Janeiro, Santiago de Chile,
and to Europe. Uruguay’s ability to compete
with the many well-established international
operators now flying these routes, however, has
been challenged in Uruguayan aviation circles,
and suggestions have been offered that such
ambitious efforts be diverted toward improving
and expanding service within the country.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Uruguay encourages all international car-
riers to make traffic stops at Montevideo.
Since Uruguay has not yet ratified any of the
bilateral air agreements it has initialed, for-
eign airlines receive their operating conces-
sions directly from the government through
the DAC.

d. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

Airfields and facilities are being steadily
improved by the government in order to at-
tract more international traffic.

Activities of the 32 aero clubs in Uruguay
are aided by government subsidization of their
pilot training programs. All but three or
four clubs have at least one light sport plane,
and a large number are equipping their or-
ganizations with ambulance planes in order
to provide improved medical services for out-
lying areas.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Uruguay apparently supports liberal prin-
ciples of international air traffic, since it has
placed no restrictions on the operations of
international carriers and has initialed Ber-
muda type air transport agreements with the
US, the UK, and the Netherlands. Although
the Uruguayan Congress has not formally rat-
ified any of these bilateral agreements, for
all practical purposes they are in effect.

b. International Organizations.

A major step toward Uruguayan member-
ship in the International Civil Aviation Or-
ganization was taken in September 1949,

when the Uruguayan Chamber of Deputies
approved adherence to the Convention. Ap-
proval by the Senate and signature by the
President are expected to follow in short
order.

c. US Technical Assistance.

Uruguay did not take advantage of an offer
of a US technical assistance mission in 1947
and the offer was withdrawn in 1948 because
of pressing requirements elsewhere.

4. Airlines.

a. Uruguayan Scheduled Airlines.

CAUSA’s profitable international route
from Montevideo to Buenos Aires has been
operated without interruption since 1938,
but PLUNA’s domestic services, started in
1936, have been much less dependable and
were interrupted for two years (1943-45)
while PLUNA was being reorganized. In 1939,
CAUSA concluded an agreement with the
Argentine airline “Corporacion” for provision
of equal capacity by the two airlines on the
Buenos Aires-Montevideo route. ALFA as-
sumed these joint operating rights when
“Corporacion” was reorganized in 1947.

(1) CAUSA (Compania Aeronautica Uru-
guaya, S.A.).

Routes: CAUSA operates two international
routes to Buenos Aires, originating flights
from both Montevideo and Colonia. The serv-
ice from Montevideo is operated in conjunc-
tion with the Argentine airline, ALFA, under
a pooling arrangement.

CAUSA’s service from Colonia offers sur-
face transport connections to Montevideo.
During the summer tourist season, CAUSA
also operates a week-end service from Monte-
video to the popular Uruguayan beach re-
sort, Punta del Este. This connects with the
Buenos Aires service. No other domestic serv-
ices are operated by CAUSA.

Equipment:
2 Junkers JU-52/3m
3 Short Sunderland
Ownership: 100 percent private Uruguayan.
(2) PLUNA (Primeras lineas Uruguayas de
Navegacion Aerea, SEM).

Routes: PLUNA operates three domestic
routes out of Montevideo, two of which. serve

SE RET
Page-93
sxfher 101

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF URUGUAY
( October, 1949 )
Unduplicated| scheduled Number
Ai nduplicate chedule: i ft i
irline Route Miles* |Miles perWeek various Types Ownership

CAUSA 154 2,772 5 100% Private
PLUNA 1,250 15,660 5 100% Gov.
TOTAL 1,404 18,432 10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline. ORE Tr-1950

 

the periphery of Uruguay. The third route
crosses Uruguay directly to the Brazilian bor-
der, serving Rivera (where connection is made
with the Brazilian airline VARIG) and
Artigas. PLUNA also operates an interna-
tional non-stop service between Montevideo
and Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Equipment: 5 DC-3

Ownership: 100 percent Uruguayan Govern-
ment.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Pan American World Airways (PAA) is the
only US carrier serving Uruguay. PAA’s east
coast route to Buenos Aires includes non-stop
service to Montevideo from both Porto Alegre
and Rio de Janeiro.

Montevideo is also on the Latin American
routes of the following six European airlines,

receiving service en route to Buenos Aires
from various Brazilian cities.

Airline Nationality
Air France France
Alitalia Italy

BOAC (British Over- UK
seas Airways Corpo-

ration)

KLM (Royal Dutch Netherlands
Airlines)

Iberia Spain

SAS (Scandinavian Norway, Denmark,
Airways System) Sweden

Two Latin American airlines serve Monte-
video: the Argentine carrier, ALFA, operates
from Buenos Aires in conjunction with Uru-
guay’s carrier, CAUSA; and a route from
Pelotas and Porto Alegre, Brazil, is flown
by the Brazilian carrier, VARIG.
Page-94
saghes

APPENDIX T

VENEZUELA

1. Government Organization for Civil Avia-
tion. -

Civil aviation in Venezuela is the respon-
sibility of a Directorate of Transportation
acting under the jurisdiction of the Minis-
try of Communications. The Directorate of
Transportation (one of six departments in
the Ministry of Communications) performs
its functions through: (1) a Division of Civil
Aeronautics; (2) a Division of Railroads; and
(3) a Division of Navigation.

Most officials of the Ministry of Communi-
cations are well informed on aviation mat-
ters and have been urging reorganization
measures to centralize the various civil avia-
tion functions.

A plan for the reorganization of the gov-
ernment’s civil aviation functions was pre-
pared by the Ministry of Communications,
with the collaboration of the US Civil Avia-
tion Mission, and has been accepted by
the present Military Junta. This reorgani-
zation was to have been put into effect in

July 1949, if funds were made available, but
there is as yet no indication that the plan
has been implemented. According to the
proposal, a Directorate of Civil Aviation
(DAC) would be created at the level of the
Directorate of Transportation and would as-
sume the government’s civil aviation func-
tions. The DAC would be composed of sec-
tions for Airline Operations, Air Safety, Avia-
tion Schools and Training, and Airports. The
planned unification of all civil aviation func-
tions within a single organization, however,
received a setback in July 1949 when, over the
objection of the Directorate of Transporta-
tion, the government decreed that the func-
tion of maintenance of airports would be the
responsibility of a Directorate of Harbors and
Airports under the jurisdiction of the Min-
istry of Public Works. .

Governmental responsibility for the func-
tion of civil aviation is presently organized as
follows:

 

 

Ministry of Communications

National Technical
Aeronautics Council

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Directorate of Transport

 

 

 

 

 

|

Five Other Directorates

 

 

 

 

 

I

a

 

Division of
Civil Aviation

 

 

 

Division of
Railroads

Division of
Navigation

 

 

 

 

ORE Tr-2050

sages 103
’

Lop. lob blank
Page-95
104 : SECAET

The proposed reorganization would establish the following relationships:

 

 

 

Ministry of Communications

National Technical
Aeronautics Council

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|
Directorate of Directorate of Five Other
Civil Aviation Transport Directorates
f I I 1
Airline Air Aviation Schools Airports
Operations Safety and Training (Operation)

 

 

 

 

In January 1946, a National Technical Aero-
nautics Council was created as a dependency
of the Ministry of Communications. This
five-man council functions as an advisory
agency on air communications, routes, and
airports and is composed of representatives
of the Ministries of War and Navy, Public
Works, and Communications, as well as repre-
sentatives of LAV (the national airline) and
of the National Council of Transportation
Routes.

In Septembér 1947, a seven-man advisory
commission was created to study and advise
on all matters pertaining to the relation-
ship of Venezuela to the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO). In February
1949, moreover, jurisdiction over the Vene-
zuelan delegation to the ICAO was transferred
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the
Ministry of Communications.

The National Civil Aeronautics Inspection
Board was reorganized in 1947 to improve its
services,

2. Domestic Civil Aviation Policy.

a. Civil Aviation Legislation.

With the assistance of a US Civil Aviation
Mission, Venezuelan aviation laws have been
revised along the lines of US legislation. A
new Civil Aviation Law to replace the Law
of 1944 was enacted by the Venezuela Con-

 

ORE Tr-2150

gress in 1948, but the Military Junta of Gov-
ernment has not yet taken action on the
law.

Decree No. 58 of 22 May 1948 replaced a
decree of 1947 as the basic law governing the
administration of LAV. According to Article
32 of the 1948 law, LAV is authorized to par-
ticipate in the creation of a company for in-
ternational operations, in which Venezuelan
capital must retain majority stock control
and effective control of the organization.

Foreign capital participation in all other
Venezuelan airlines is also limited by law to
49 percent, majority. control to reside in
Venezuelan nationals.

bv. Regulation of Venezuelan Airlines.

The separation of civil aeronautics from
Air Force control after the 1945 revolution
greatly improved the position of Venezuelan
civil aviation, especially commercial opera-
tions. With the exception of increased aid
and promotion of LAV, no change in civil
aviation policies appears to have resulted from
the assumption of power by the Military Junta
in November 1948. The proposed reorgani-
zation of the Division of Civil Aeronautics
would render it a larger and more autono-
mous entity, with virtually complete control
of all civil air affairs.

syparr
Page-96
suger 105

The objectives of the present Division are:
(1) the expansion of the State airline LAV;
(2) the construction and improvement of air
facilities; and (3) the encouragement of pri-
vate flying. LAV is operated by the govern-
ment as an independent entity and receives
generous financial assistance. The govern-
ment also participates to a limited extent in
the capital of the two other Venezuelan
scheduled carriers. Through LAV, it holds
a 7.5 percent interest in AVENSA, and a 12.2
percent interest in TACA de Venezuela. Com-
petition with the established carriers, espe-
cially with LAV, is discouraged, as are non-
scheduled operations. To date, only cargo
carriers have been authorized to operate non-
scheduled services within Venezuela.

c. Regulation of Foreign Airlines.

Since the inauguration of international
services by LAV in 1946, the operations of for-
eign airlines have been subject to closer sur-
veillance by the Venezuelan Government.
Although Venezuela favors the operation of
US airlines into its territory and also en-
courages non-scheduled flights to Venezuela
from abroad, it is willing to grant permission
for such services and flights only when they
do not compete directly with LAV. More-
over, Venezuela has asserted its right to ap-
prove the tariffs of all foreign airlines stop-
ping in Venezuelan territory. The privileges
of cabotage enjoyed in Venezuela for many
years by Pan American World Airways were
terminated 15 October 1947. Venezuela’s only
bilateral air agreement is with the US and that
has not been ratified. Therefore, all foreign
carriers operate to Venezuela on the basis of
permits issued by the Directorate of Trans-
port.

a. Promotion of Other Aviation Activity.

It is Venezuelan policy to bring the con-
struction and improvement of all aviation
facilities under control of the government.
In accordance with an extensive program
planned early in 1948, substantial govern-
ment appropriations have been expended for
the gradual purchase of existing airfields and
the improvement or construction of additional
facilities. Perhaps the greatest obstacle to
the progress of Venezuelan civil aviation has
been the country’s lack of adequate airports,
communications and meteorological facilities.

Improvements have been made at all of the
principal traffic centers within the past few
years, however, as well as at most of the sec-
ondary airports. Extensive improvements
now in progress on the Caracas airport, La
Carlota, will prevent use of that facility until
at least the middle of 1950. In addition,
studies are being made of the possibility of.
providing air service to other population cen-
ters throughout the country.

Plans for the unification of the existing pri-
vate air communications systems were for-
mulated during 1947 and a private company,
Radio Aeronautico Venezolano, was formed
for that purpose. Although most of the do-
mestic and foreign airlines agreed to par-
ticipate in the company, little actual progress
has been made on unification of services. A
comprehensive plan for a modern, govern-
ment-controlled airways communication and
navigation system has been prepared by the
US Civil Aviation Mission for the considera-
tion of the Ministry of Communications, and
it is probable that this proposal will eventu-
ally be adopted.

The five Venezuelan flying clubs receive no
direct subsidies from the government. They
are all equipped with aircraft, however, and
benefit indirectly from the training given at
the government-operated school, ‘Miguel
Rodriquez,” at Maracay, which offers training
to both air and ground personnel.

The Polytechnic Institute of Aviation,
established at Caracas in 1948, offers Link
trainer instrument flight training under gov-
ernment auspices, as well as instruction in
navigation, meteorology, aerodynamics, and
radio, for pilots of the domestic airlines and
private fliers.

There is no production of airframes or air-
craft engines in Venezuela. The country is
one of the best markets in Latin America,
however, for the sale of aviation equipment.

3. International Civil Aviation Policy.
a. Air Traffic Policy and Air Agreements.

Motivated by a desire to protect its na-
tional airline from undue foreign competition,
Venezuela’s air policy toward foreign airlines
tends to be restrictive. For example, Vene-
zuela has opposed the recognition of Fifth
Freedom air rights in a multilateral agree-

cefes
Page-97
106

ment and also believes that air routes should
be negotiated on a bilateral basis.

Negotiation of a US-Venezuela bilateral air
agreement, the only Venezuelan air agree-
ment to date, was concluded on 14 May
1948. Continued Venezuelan failure to ratify
this agreement, however, has required each
country to grant temporary operating permits
to the airlines of the other country. Vene-
zuela’s LAV is currently seeking extension
of its temporary operating permit or the grant
of a permanent one by the US Civil Aero-
nautics Board (CAB). On the other hand,
Chicago and Southern Air Line (C&S) of the
US holds a temporary Venezuelan permit of
indefinite duration (presumably until rati-
fication of the agreement). Although C&S
has been certificated by the US CAB to make
traffic stops at Habana, its Venezuelan permit
does not authorize the carriage of traffic be-
tween Habana and Caracas since such service
would be in direct competition with LAV.

b. International Organizations.

Venezuela has taken an active part in the
International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) since it adhered to the Chicago Con-
vention in April 1947. LAV is a member of
the International Air Transport Association
(IATA).

c. US Technical Assistance.

In July 1948, at the request of the Vene-
zuelan Government, a US Civil Aviation Mis-
sion was assigned to Caracas to assist the Min-
istry of Communications in planning its serv-
ices related to commercial aviation. A com-
munications specialist was added to the mis-
sion later in the year. This mission collabo-
rated with the Ministry of Communications
in the preparation of a plan for reorganization
of the civil aviation functions within the Vene-
zuelan Government (see Section 1). In ad-
dition, a number of LAV employees and offi-
cials of the Ministry of Communications have
taken advantage of Civil Aeronautics Admin-
istration training courses in the US.

4. Airlines.

a. Venezuelan Scheduled Airlines.

The three Venezuelan scheduled airlines
have maintained a steady development since
the end of the war. These carriers, LAV,
AVENSA, and TACA de Venezuela, have ex-

SEC

ET

tended their routes, acquired additional mod-
ern equipment, and have substantially in-
creased their passenger and freight traffic.
Although LAV was authorized in 1948 to par-
ticipate in the creation of a new international
airline (see Section 2, a.), there seems to be
little prospect of this plan being carried out
in the near future.

Military pilots are used in rotation for LAV
operations because insufficient numbers of
civilian pilots are available. Although LAV’s
credit is good, several large government ap-
propriations have been necessary to cover its
indebtedness and keep the line in operation.
In the past, politics have figured heavily in
the administration of LAV. Recently, how-
ever, more efficient administration of the air-
line has made some progress in eliminating its
heavy operating losses. LAV has a fairly
good safety record.

Key personnel in AVENSA, the Pan Ameri-
can World Airways (PAA) subsidiary which
was established in 1943, were recruited from
PAA. The staff is composed largely of Amer-
icans, in spite of the fact that AVENSA’s
franchise from the Venezuelan Government
requires that its employees shall be exclusively
Venezuelan nationals within its first four
years of operation.

US personnel have also played an impor-
tant role in the operations of TACA de Vene-
zuela. Although it was required by the 1945
reorganization of TACA that 75 percent of
its executive personnel and 50 percent of its
operational personnel be Venezuelan, almost.
all pilots are North Americans, while co-pilots
are mostly Venezuelan.

A small cargo line, Compania Rutas Aereas
Nacionales, S.A. (RANSA), was authorized in
May 1949 to add chartered passenger serv-
ice and scheduled cargo service to its former
non-scheduled cargo operations. This air-
line operates a fleet of three C-47’s and three
C-46’s. Two other small airlines, CAVE and
SAVANA, have been authorized during 1949
to operate non-scheduled cargo service within
the country.*

 

*In November 1949 Compania Anonima Viajes
Expresos (CAVE), a Venezuelan non-scheduled pas-
senger and freight airline, was authorized by the

enezuelan Ministry of Communications to conduct

SEYRET
Page-98
s ofan 107

(1) AVENSA (Aerovias Venezolanas, S.A.).
Routes: AVENSA’s operations, which are
domestic only, serve the principal cities of the
populous northern and coastal regions of Ven-
ezuela in a generally east-west direction from
the border of British Guiana to the Colombian
border. Routes are regularly operated from
Guiria (opposite Trinidad), Maturin, and Ciu-
dad Bolivar in the east to San Antonio in the
far west of Venezuela, via the northern cities
of Caracas,* Coro, and Maracaibo.
Equipment:
1 DC-4
14 DC-3
2 C-47 (cargo only)
2 Lockheed Electra
1 North American AT-6
1 Stinson Reliant

 

international services to Europe. To implement this
permit CAVE organized an international division,
Aerovias Venezolanas Europa (AVE), and with two
leased DC-4 aircraft commenced weekly service to
Madrid, Paris, and Rome in mid-January 1950. In
June 1950 AVE was operating two weekly flights to
Lisbon, one flight continuing to Rome, the other to
Madrid and Paris.

* All airlines serving Caracas use Maiquetia Air-
port, near the coastal city of La Guaira.

Ownership:

55.45 percent private Venezuelan

37.05 percent US (Pan American World
Airways)

7.50 percent Government of Venezuela
(through the airline LAV, which is
owned by the government).

AVENSA was the first privately owned com-
mercial airline to be established in Venezuela,
receiving its operating permit from the gov-
ernment in May 1943.

(2) TACA de Venezuela (Linea Aerea TACA
de Venezuela, C.A.).

Routes: TACA’s principal domestic routes
serve the same general area as .those of
AVENSA; i.e., the populous northern coastal
region of Venezuela. In addition to its pre-
dominantly east-west routes in the north,
TACA also operates from Caracas south to
San Fernando in central Venezuela, and from
Ciudad Bolivar south to Icabaru on the Bra-
zilian border. TACA operates one interna-
tional route to the capital of Colombia, Bo-
gota, from Caracas and Maracaibo.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AIRLINES OF VENEZUELA
( October, 1949 )
. Number
Airline Pane deated Scheduled of Aircraft Ownership
oute Miles* |Miles per Week| (Various Types)
; 55.45% Private
AVENSA 1,833 62,279 21 37.05% U.S.
7,50% Gov.
42.8% Private
TACA 3,243 61,955 19 12.2% Gov.
45.0% TACA
LAV 7,308 84,774 34 100% Gov.
TOTAL 12, 384 209,008 14

 

 

 

 

* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which

are not duplicated by an individual airline.

ORE Tr- 2250

SEYRET
Page-99
108 SEC

Equipment: 19 DC-3
Ownership:

42.8 percent private Venezuelan

12.2 percent Government of Venezuela
(through the airline LAV, which is
owned by the government)

45.0 percent TACA Airways, S.A.
(which is controlled by US interests)

TACA de Venezuela was organized in Au-
gust 1944 and commenced scheduled opera-
tions in January 1945.

(3) LAV (Lineas Aeropostal Venezolana).

Routes: Domestic. The majority of LAV’s
domestic routes lie in the populous Caribbean
coastal region and extend to all principal
cities in northern Venezuela, including Ca-
racas, Coro, Maracaibo, Barquisimeto, Barce-
jona, Maturin, and Ciudad Bolivar. Southern
Venezuela receives LAV service over the fol-
lowing routes: Barquisimeto to Guasdualito
in the west, Caracas to Puerto Ayacucho in
the center of the country, and Ciudad Bolivar
to Santa Elena in the east. (The latter route
extends across the Brazilian border to Boa
Vista.)

International. LAV’s principal interna-
tional route links the country with Habana
and New York. Other international services
are flown to neighboring countries: Aruba
(N.W.L.), Trinidad (B.W.1.) and, as indicated
above, Brazil (Boa Vista). Although LAV
has an interline agreement with LANSA, the
Colombian airline, for joint Caracas-Bogota
service, only the latter is actually operating
over this route.

Equipment:

4 Lockheed Constellation
2 Martin 202
24 DC-3

3 Lockheed Lodestar

1 Stinson

Ownership: 100 percent Venezuelan Gov-
ernment. LAV is an autonomous government
corporation.

LAV was organized by the Venezuelan Gov-
ernment in 1933 to take over the operations
of the Venezuelan branch of the French air-
line, Compagnie Generale Aeropostale, which
had gone bankrupt.

b. Foreign Scheduled Airlines.

Venezuela is served by two US-flag sched-
uled airlines: Pan American World Airways

T

(PAA), and Chicago and Southern Air Lines
(C&S). PAA operates two routes from the
US to Caracas via Curacao: one from New
York and San Juan, and the other from Miami
and Ciudad Trujillo (Dominican Republic).
In addition, PAA operates an east-west serv-
ice along the Caribbean coast of South Amer-
ica from Trinidad to Panama. This route
passes through four Venezuelan cities: Ma-
turin, Barcelona, Caracas and Maracaibo, and
makes connections in Panama and Trinidad
for other points in Latin America. The sec-
ond US operator, C&S, links the US and Vene-
zuela over a Houston-New Orleans-Habana-
Kingston-Caracas route. This profitable op-
eration serves the two major petroleum-pro-
ducing areas of the Western Hemisphere.

Two US non-scheduled operatoi’s, more-
over, have been granted Venezuelan authori-
zation to perform scheduled services between
Venezuela and Europe. Those carriers,
Transocean and Trans-Caribbean, operate
from Caracas to Rome, where connections via
other airlines are made for Madrid, since
direct flights have not been authorized by
Spain.

The Spanish airline, Iberia, inaugurated
direct one-carrier service between Madrid
and Caracas in the summer of 1949. An
Italian carrier, LATI, also commenced serv-
ice about the same time, linking Caracas and
Rome via Sevilla. Service from Caracas to
Lisbon and beyond is offered by KLM, the
Royal Dutch Airline, which also operates nu-
merous flights from Curacao (its, West In-
dies Division headquarters just off the Vene-
zuelan coast) to Maracaibo, Caracas, and
Barcelona en route to other points in the
Latin American area and to Europe.

British West Indian Airways also serves
Venezuela in its Caribbean operations, origi-
nating flights to Caracas from Trinidad and
Barbados and continuing on to Curacao and
Kingston, Jamaica.

With respect to Latin American airlines, the
Brazilian carrier, Aerovias Brasil, makes a
traffic stop at Caracas on its Rio de Janeiro-
Miami service, entering Venezuela from Port
of Spain and continuing on to Ciudad
Trujillo.

SECKET
Page-100
sufher

APPENDIX U

AIRLINES OF BRITISH COLONIES AND PUERTO RICO

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

_ AIRLINES OF THE BRITISH COLONIES & PUERTO RICO
(October, 1949)
; Number
Airline |Unduplicated| Scheduled | of aircraft | Ownership
Route Miles* [Miles perWeek(various Types)
Trinidad BWIA 4,854 33,598 9 Brit, Govt.
Jamai BCA 1,128 3,770 3 Brit. Govt.
eae CIA 327 654 1 { Brit. (Priv.)
Bahamas BAL 152 1,250 5 Brit, Govt.
Brit. Guiana BGA 1,800 2,179 4 U.S.
Puerto Rico CAA 388 12,051 3 U.S,
TOTAL 9,621 56,022 25
* The term ‘‘Unduplicated’’ refers only to those route miles which
are not duplicated by an individual airline. ORE Tr-2350

1. British Colonies.

Civil aviation affairs in the British colonies
of Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica, and the
Bahamas are in each case supervised by a
Department of Civil Aviation in the Colonial
Government, although final responsibility for
the determination of policy rests with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation in the UK.

a. Trinidad.

This colony is the operational base for Brit-
ish West Indian Airways, Ltd. (BWIA), which
operates the most extensive network of any
of the airlines incorporated within the Carib-
bean area. There is no local air service on
the island of Trinidad.

BWIA was organized in 1940 by Mr. Lowell
Yerex, the founder of the TACA System (see
Panama, Section 5). The company was
owned entirely by Yerex until 1943, when it
was incorporated and shares were sold to the
public. Yerex soon sold his 40 percent stock
interest to TACA Airways, S.A., the non-oper-
ating holding company for the TACA System,

sues

which in turn gradually sold all of this stock
to British citizens. During 1947, British
Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), an
entity of the British Government bought up
all shares in BWIA.

Routes: BWIA’s colonial routes connect
Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, with all the impor-
tant British possessions bordering the Carib-
bean Sea and with British Guiana. Opera-
tions also extend west to Kingston (Jamaica)
and Belize (British, Honduras). BWIA’s in-
ternational routes extend from St. Kitts and
Kingston to Ciudad Trujillo (Dominican Re-
public), and from Port-of-Spain and Barbados
to Caracas (Venezuela) and beyond to Curacao
(Netherlands West Indies). From Curacao,
BWIA provides direct connections to Kingston.

Equipment:

4 Lockheed Lodestar
5 Vickers Viking

Ownership: 100 percent British Govern-
ment.

Trinidad is probably the principal air hub
on the northern coast of South America. In

109
Page-101
110 : sagher

addition to the extensive service provided by
BWIA to points in the Caribbean area, the
airlines of five countries connect Trinidad with
points in the US, Canada, and South America:

Pan American World Airways (PAA).
Trinidad is the eastern terminus for PAA serv-
ice across the northern coast of South America,
as well as the southern terminus of PAA’s
Antilles routes. In addition, it is an impor-
tant traffic stop on PAA service from the US
to the east coast of South America.

Trans-Canada Air Lines (TCA). Trinidad
is the southern terminus of TCA’s routes from
Canada either via Bermuda, or via Nassau
(Bahamas) and Kingston (Jamaica).:

Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM). KLM's West
Indies service connects Trinidad with Curacao,
Barcelona (Venezuela), and Paramaribo
(Dutch Guiana).

Aerovias Brasil. Trinidad is a traffic stop
on Aerovias Brasil’s Rio de Janeiro-Miami serv-
ice via Paramaribo, Caracas and Ciudad Tru-
jillo.

Linea Aeropostal Venezolana (LAV). LAV
serves Trinidad on a route connecting with
Maturin and other points in Venezuela.

b. Jamaica.

This island is too small to support more
than token air service within its territory.
Two cities, Kingston and Montego Bay, are on
international routes and, although a good
road connects them (85 miles), there is suffi-
cient travel between the cities to justify an
air-shuttle service by British Caribbean Air-
ways (BCA).

Jamaica has been served on international
routes since 1930, when PAA began service
to the island. In addition to BCA, a second
company, Caribbean International Airways
(CIA), bases its operations in Jamaica, al-
though the latter company is registered in
Nassau (Bahamas). Both are relatively new
airlines, BCA having been organized in 1946,
and CIA in 1948. A Jamaican family owned
BCA until October 1949, when British Over-
seas Airways Corporation (BOAC) purchased
the stock. BCA’s operations reportedly will
be merged with those of British West Indian
Airways(BWIA). The main activity of CIA is
charter flying. Although it has operated a
weekly scheduled service between Kingston
and the Cayman Islands since June 1948, CIA

has not been formally authorized by the Brit-
ish Government to conduct scheduled service
on this route. In June 1949, the US Civil
Aeronautics Board granted CIA a permit for
non-scheduled service between the Cayman
Islands and Tampa, Florida.

British Caribbean Airways, Ltd. (BCA).

Routes:

Kingston-Montego Bay
Kingston-Miami
Montego Bay-Nassau

Equipment:

2 DC-3

. 1 Lockheed Lodestar

Ownership: 100 percent British Government
(through BOAC)

Caribbean International
(CIA).

Routes: Kingston-Cayman Islands (sched-
uled)

Kingston-Tampa (non-scheduled)

Equipment: 1 PBY

Ownership: 100 percent private British citi-
zens.

The following six international airlines serve
Jamaica:

Pan American World Airways (PAA). pro-
vides direct or connecting service to Kingston
from most of the important traffic points in
the Caribbean area. In addition, Montego
Bay is served from Camaguey, Cuba.

Chicago & Southern Air Lines (C&S) serves
Kingston on flights from New Orleans to
Caracas, and also operates from Houston to
Kingston via Habana.

Royal Dutch Airlines (KLM) operates to
Kingston from Port-au-Prince, Haiti, and from
Aruba (Netherlands West Indies).

British West Indian Airways (BWIA) offers
direct service from Ciudad Trujillo and
Curacao.

British Overseas Airways Corporation
(BOAC) provides Kingston with service from
Europe via Bermuda or Nassau en route to
Panama and South America.

Trans-Canada Air Lines (TCA) serves
Kingston on its Canada-Trinidad route.

c. Bahamas.

Air transportation was introduced to this
British colony by PAA in 1929 over a route
serving the tourist traffic between Miami and

Airways, .Ltd.

SECRET
Page-102
SECRET

Nassau. Bahamas Airways (BAL) also oper-
ated over this route for a short time, but now
flies from Nassau to West Palm Beach. BAL
is the only airline now operating scheduled
services within the Bahamas.

Bahamas Airways, Lid. (BAL)

Routes: BAL connects Nassau with the outer
islands of the northern part of the Bahama
group. Scheduled international flights are
operated between Nassau and West Palm
Beach. Charter operations are conducted
throughout the Caribbean area.

Equipment:

1 PBY

1 Consolidated Commodore
2 Grumman Goose

1 Republic Seabee

Ownership: 100 percent British Government
(through BOAC).

In addition to BAL’s flights, the Bahamas
are served at Nassau by Pan American World
Airways (PAA) on a direct flight from Miami,
by British Overseas Airways Corporation
(BOAC) en route from Bermuda to Habana,
by Trans-Canada Air Lines (TCA) on its
Canada-Kingston-Port-of-Spain service, and
by British Caribbean Airways which connects
with Montego Bay, Jamaica.

d. British Guiana.

British Guiana Airways, Ltd. (BGA), the
only airline in this colony, has been owned and
operated since 1934 by Major A. J. Williams, a
US citizen. BGA conducted charter opera-
tions until 1939, when it signed a three-year
agreement with the Government of British
Guiana to operate scheduled service to interior
points. In return, BGA received an annual
subsidy. It is not known, however, whether
this subsidy was continued after expiration of
the original contract. The government has
never attempted to replace BGA with a British-
owned air service and has even refused per-
mission for other airlines to operate within
British Guiana. The Colonial Government
took action in 1948 to reduce BGA rates.

Routes: Five routes radiate from George-
town to all sections of British Guiana except
the region north of that city. Most of the
towns served are river ports in the interior.

 

11

“Charter operations, both within and outside

British Guiana, are also an important activity
of BGA.

Equipment:

2 DC-3
2 Grumman Goose

Ownership: 100 percent private US.

British Guiana is served by Pan American
World Airways on its service from Port-of-
Spain to Paramaribo, Cayene and points in
Brazil. British West Indian Airways also
provides connections with Port-of-Spain, as
well as Barbados.

2. Puerto Rico.

Caribbean-Atlantic Airlines, Inc. (CAA) was
incorporated in Puerto Rico in 1939. Both
CAA and its former rival on the island,. Aero-
vias Nacionales de Puerto Rico, Inc. (Aero-
vias), applied to the US Civil Aeronautics
Board for operating permits in 1939 and 1940,
respectively. The applications were consoli-
dated by the Board and CAA was issued a cer-
tificate in 1942 to operate between certain
points in Puerto Rico, and also to St. Thomas
and St. Croix in the Virgin Islands. Aerovias
was denied a certificate and went out of exist-
ence shortly thereafter. CAA continues. to
enjoy the distinction of being the sole US car-
rier incorporated in the Carribean area.

Routes: Caribbean-Atlantic connects the is-
land of Puerto Rico with the Virgin Islands,
and with the Dominican Republic. It also
operates two short routes within Puerto Rico.

Equipment: 3 DC-3

Ownership: 100 percent private US citizens.
(The company is at present controlled by three
members of the Trige family who hold 65.9
percent of the capital.)

Two US carriers and one French airline
serve San Juan, Puerto Rico.

Pan American World Airways (PAA) con-
nects San Juan directly with New York, Miami,
Ciudad Trujillo, Curacao, and Port-of-Spain.
In addition, San Juan is the northern terminus
of PAA’s route through the Lesser Antilles.

Eastern Air Lines (EAL) also provides direct
Miami-San Juan service.

Air France serves San Juan from Guade-
loupe and Martinique with PBY aircraft.

SEeKET
Page-103
and/d
OS Hd At fy 19g

 

GPO—SSO—5585