
Page-1
4 t

oo Appiwe vt tye Release , \ Vv ME 55263
[oat a eddy 1 gee
_ A 10 April 1963
A who LEEMRRaRy Pay

M. tudeturey Reviews
Kase ON UL ')

>

Docuusent t a

 
 
  
   
  

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE:
NUMBFR 55-63
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations partiarpated i Ihe preparation of

this estimate:
ol the Depart

amd BISA,

 

The Central lntotligence: Agency and the Intelligence argent
tients ol State, Delensea, the Anny, the Thavy, the Aw |

 

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence aud Research, Deparment of tale
Director, Delensa Intelligence Agency
Assistant Chief of Staff tor intelligence, Department of the Auwy

oe Awistant Chiet of Naval Operations (latelligence), Deparment ‘ob the Navy

Assistant Chih of Statl, Intelligence, USAL

Director for Inalliqence, Joint otaft! i

Director of the Manonal Security Agency

Abstaining: a on
-Raprmtotitive, to, the USIB,, andthe, Assptant ey
o | jeu balay, autade of theie |

ys

  

Tha Atomics Eriergy Cau
© Directors Faderal Buroug of Investigation, the “suby

jurisdiction: |}
: reps h

   

     

 
  
 

REG
RN
Ratt

areata
Page-3
L 7

- NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE -
NUMBER 55-63

Indonesia's International Orientation
Page-4
LC

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Page

THE PROBLEM... .. 1... eee ee 1

CONCLUSIONS ... 1... ee 1

DISCUSSION... 1... ee ee 8

I, MAJOR DETERMINANTS OF INDONESIAN FOREIGN POL- 3
ICY ct

A. Sukamo . et 3

B. The Armed Forces. © 2. os 1 ee ee ee 6

C. The Indonesian Communist Party rs 6

D. The Economic Situation. ©... 2... eee eee qT

Il, TRENDS IN INDONESIAN FOREIGN POLICY. ...... 8

A. Regional Ambitions. 2... 0 ee 8

B. Ambitiona for Afro-Asian Leadership. .......-.. 12

Ill, FOREIGN INFLUENCES... . 2... 2... ee tees 13

A. The USSR... 13

B. Communist China. ....... 16

C.TheUS. we 16

1.8(@)(4)(6)

—|

 

tL
Page-5
LA

INDONESIA‘S
INTERNATIONAL
ORIENTATION

THE PROBLEM

To estimate major trends in Indonesian foreign policy over the
next year or go,

CONCLUSIONS

A. Sukarno is the unchallenged leader of Indonesia. Indo-
nesian foreign policy is conducted largely in accordance with his
personal views and in support of his aspirations for personal and
national glory. Neither the army nor the Indonesian Commu-
nist Party (PKI), upon whom he depends for domestic support,
imposes significant restraints upon his formulations of foreign
policy. His foreign policy actions are, however, in some measure
influenced by a desire to remain on good terms with both East
and West; the Indonesian military establishment is now depend-
ent on the USSR and Indonesia's economy requires extensive
Western trade and assistance. (Para. 1)

B. Indoneaia is potentially the leading nation of southeast
Asia, and a sense of national destiny is prompting it to seek
hegemony over neighboring Malay peoples. The current focus
of Indonesian attention is the proposed Federation of Malaysia
to whose disruption Sukarno is committed. He is likely, however,
to stop short of open military intervention because of reluctance
to face the UK directly and concern over US reactions. The
probable creation of Malaysia by August 1963 will not halt
Sukarno's efforts to dominate the area. Indonesia almost cer-
tainly intends to annex Portuguese Timor when the time is pro-

pitious, probably within the next two or three years. (Paras.
21-25)

— }
Page-6
L

C. The USSR'y massive military aid Program has increased
Soviet influence with Sukarno and enlarged his capability to
challenge Western interests in southeast Asia. Nevertheleas,

ever, Sukarno embarks on foreign adventures, his freedom of
action may be impaired by dependence on Soviet military sup-
port and on PKI Political support at home, (Paras, 28-33, 37)

D. We believe that, under present conditions, the USSR is
unlikely to seek and Sukarno is unlikely to agree to the estab-
Ushment of Soviet air, naval, or strategic missile bases in Indo-
nesia. The USSR might, however, be permitted limited use of
Indonesian air and naval bases, (Paras, 34-36) .

E. Sukarno’s basic attitude toward the West, including the US,
is one of suspicion, His ambitions for regional domination can
only be achieved at the expense of Western interests. Neverthe-

leas, Indonesia's economic_ties have remained overwhelmingly
with the Weatern, World, Ee :

—) (Paras, 40-43)

1Stay(ayisy
Page-7
L A

DISCUSSION

|. MAJOR DETERMINANTS OF INDONESIAN FOREIGN POLICY

A. Sukarno ~

1. President Sukarno is the unchallenged leader of Indonesia. Indo-
nesian foreign Policy is conducted largely in accordance with his per-
Sonal views and in support of his aspirations for Personal and national
glory. Sukarno has retained his Pre-eminent position in great part
by playing off &gainst each other the only other major political forces
in Indonesia, the army and the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI),
Nevertheless, hig continuing need for the support of these two forceg

Jation of foreign Policy, since the army now shares or at least €acquiesceg
in his views, and the PKI, for tactical Teaaons, supports them, Sukarno’s
foreign policy ambitions ang objectives have been Benerally accepted
88 national goals, His foreign Policy actions are, however, in some
measure influenced by a desire to re jain on good terms with both Hast

2. Sukarno's Principal domestic objectives are the maintenance and
strengthening of his political authority, the forging of Indonesian na-
tional unity, and the development of & government-controlled economy
free of foreign influence. In foreign affairs, he seeks for Indonesia
hegemony over Neighboring Malay peoples and the status of a major
power, and, for himself, the leadership of the “nonaligned” world,

3. Advances toward each of these goals have continually brought
Sukarno into conflict with the West, Opposition to hig authoritarian-
ism was provided chiefly by Western-oriented politicians. Separatist
Tebels in Sumatra, and the Colebes were allied with many of these same
elements, and, more importantly, received material support trom West.
ern sources, The West New Guinea dispute long provided the biggest

4. With the West New Guinea issue Tesolved and with Indonesia,
for the first time since Independence, almost completely free from any
significant threat of armed dissidence, it is now stated Indonesian Policy

— J 3

=
ee
Page-8
EJ

that the next major goal of the government is restoration of the do-
mestic economy. Sukarno has announced repeatedly that this is his
plan and that ‘creign aid will be necessary to its accomplishment.
However, Suk: temperament makes such a program difficult. He
frankly admits that he neither understands nor is interested in eco-
nomics, Even if he decides to adopt certain recommended stabilization
policies, he is unlikely to follow them consistently when they prove
incompatible with political considerations.

6, In addition to the fact that Sukarno’s ambitions for regional dom!-
nation can only be achieved at the expense of Western interests, his
basic philosophic outlook is conditioned by a commitment to authori-
tarian and socialistic patterns of government, and by an obsessive anti-
colonialism still focused on the remaining Western interests in the
underdeveloped world. He sees the present world situation as funda-
mentally a struggle between “old established forces” and “new emerg-
ing forces,” the latter struggling to throw off the shackles of imperial-
ism and capitalism imposed by the former. This doctrinaire approach,
which echoes in many respects familiar Communist themes, has already
been responsible for Sukarno’s reluctance to condemn Bloc actions in
such situations as Korea, Tibet, Hungary, nuclear testing, and the
Sino-Indian border war; he is the only: neutralist who has expreasly
endorsed the Bloc line on Germany and Berlin. It will almost certainly
also help to give an anti-Western cast to most of his future interna-
tional initiatives.

6. At the same time, Sukarno is not unaware of the danger that
Indonesia might become so closely identified with the Bloc or so de-
pendent upon Bloc material support as to impair his independence
of action. His doctrinal prejudices have not prevented him from play-
ing East off against West in Indonesia's own interest, and he doubt-
less looks forward to a time when he can proceed under less obligation
to either side.

7. In the conduct of foreign affairs, Sukarno has gradually eliminated
dissenting voices. Of the few supporters who exerciae a degree of in-
fluence over him, the most prominent are Foreign Minister Subandrio,
Information Minister Abdulgani, and, to a lesser extent, First Minister
Djuanda and PKI Chairman Aldit. Defense Minister (and Chief of
Staff of the Armed Forces) Nasution probably still exercises some re-
straining influence on Sukarno in the foreign policy field, but his in-
fluence has been seriously eroded over the past year.

8. In the event of Sukarno's death, incapacity, or—as seems highly
unlikely—his removal from power, the broad outlines of Indonesian
foreign policy would probably change only alightly, at least in the early
stages, The most likely successor government would be a non-Com-
munist military and civilian group, heavily dependent on the armed

‘ CI

1.3(a)(4)(5)
Page-9
L J

forces to maintain control of the country. The group would probably
include most of Sukarno'a top aides with the exception of Aidit and
possibly Subandrio, whose relations with the military have been mutu-
ally hostile. Such a government would almost. certainly adhere to a
policy of nonalignment, although it would possibly be less pro-Bloc,
The aggressively nationalistic doctrines of the Sukarno era, the broad
commitment to international neutralism and regional hegemony, and
the desire to remain on good terms with the USSR would Persist and
hinder any rapid shift. toward pro-Western positions in foreign Policy,
The PKI, now heavily dependent on Sukarno for the maintenance of
its prominent role in national affairs, would lose influence; if it turned
to @ more militant line, it might be subjected to repressive measures,

B. The Armed Forces

9. The military leadership, a moderating force in foreign policy dur-
ing the West New Guinea campaign, is not likely to play such a role
in the Malaysian affair. General Nasution, Army Chief of Staff Gen-
eral Jani, and certain lesser military leaders are all committed to
Sukarno’s anti-Malaysia campaign. The army has already been involved
in clandestine activities against northern Borneo and is preparing for
more extensive covert operations dn that region as well as in Portuguese
Timor. Naval and air patrols, designed to implement the new Policy
of “confrontation” of Malaya, are being carried out. Nasution and Jani
are also genuinely concerned lest army hesitation in pressing the anti-
Malaysla campaign leave the fleld to Subandrio or the PKI and their
respective clandestine organizations. At mogt, the military leadership
will stress ta Sukarno the need for caution)

10. The willingness and the effectiveness of the military in restrain-
ing Sukarno in the foreign policy fleld is Ukely to diminish. Nasution
has been elevated to Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, but this has
removed him from direct control of the army, where his successor is
the less politically sophisticated General Jani. Another element of
rivalry on which Sukarno can Play springs from the recent increase
in the strength and confidence of the navy and air force, which have
received the bulk of modern Soviet equipment delivered to Indonesia
and which actively Participated in the successful West New Guinea
campaign. Although Nasution is still the principal spokesman for the
military and the military remains a major force in Indonesian politics,
its influence on foreign policy has been diluted and diffused,

11, Perhaps most Important, military leaders are concerned that
Opposition to Sukarno’s foreign policies would accelerate the prospective
decline of their domestic influence, With West New Guinea virtually
annexed and internal security restored, the martial law decrees under
which the army has exercised broad political and economic powers since

—— | 5

 

1.3(a)(4)(5)
Page-10
|

1957 are scheduled to be rescinded. Civil government will be restored
by 1 May 1963, and the responsibility for internal security will be turned
over to the Nationa) Police. The army may lose some positions in the
Cabinet, where a major reshuffle is in prospect. The army’s position
is also being undermined by the PKI and by ambitious non-Communist
politicians, particularly Subandrio, all seeking to make the army the
scapegoat for the deteriorating economic situation.

12, The army is seeking to minimize the prospective loss of political
influence by filling strategic administrative posts at local and national
levels with trustworthy civilians and former officers. It also plans to
continue its support of the relatively small but efficient and anti-Com-
munist National Police, Most important, the army is broadening its
various rural development activities into a large-scale civic action pro-
gram designed to improve its image among the people and counter
the growth of PKI influence in the villages. In the total political pic-
ture, however, the most likely prospect is for some diminution of mill-
tary influence.

C. The Indonesian Communist Party

13. The PKI is at present the only significant political party in Indo-
nesia. Under his concept of “guided démocracy,” Sukarno has almost
eliminated the influence of the non-Communist parties on national
policy. Even the PKI poses few obstacles for Sukarno in the foreign
policy field so long as he pursues a course generally inimical to West-
ern interests. The PKI will continue to stress anticolonial issues, which
will enable it to ride in tandem with Sukarno and strengthen its na-
tionalist image. It is already heavily involved in subversive activities
abroad in league with leftist parties in Malaya, Singapore, and Sarawak.
It is contributing volunteers to army-sponsored paramilitary units train-
ing for operations in western Sarawak, and it possesses independent
links with Chinese-dominated Communist paramilitary groups in the
same region. At home, it {s mobilizing its various mass organizations
in support of Sukarno’s anti-Malaysia program.

14. Although for at least a decade Sukarno and the Communists
have found a community of interest in the foreign policy fleld, conflicts
of interest have arisen and will continue to arise as he seeks to main-
tain a semblance of balance between Hast and West. For example,
Sukarno has been at variance with the PKI in maintaining a fairly
restrained Cuba line, keeping neutral on the Sino-Indian issue, and
accepting the US Peace Corps. [7

—

 

15. The PKI is meanwhile gradually increasing its influence ‘Tocally
and nationally by cautious exploitation of economic issues. Sukarno
views Aidit and his followers as potential recruits to Sukarno's own brand

6 L |

 

1.8(a)(4)(&)
Page-11
co

of socialism, and relations between the two men have long been close.
The PKI still functions largely outside the official governmental ap-
paratus, but it is now making its strongest bid since independence to
acquire Cabinet representation. The intensity of this bid results not
only from PKI confidence in its present influence, but also from in-
creased pressures by the PKI's militant faction, which is pro-Peiping
though not demonstrably under Pelping's control. The influence of this
faction is strong and seems likely to grow. The militants are probably
willing to acquiesce in Aidit’s policy of supporting Sukarno so long as
this course offers substantial promise for expanding Communist influ-
ence and fostering hostility toward the West. They would, however,
use any setback, such as failure to win posts jn the Cabinet, to attack
Aidit and improve their own position within the PKI. Sukarno distrusts
the pro-Peiping faction of the PKI, and his tolerance of PKI activities
would probably be reduced if this faction became dominant.

16. Throughout the period of this estimate, the principal PKI threat
to Sukarno will probably not be an increase in its domestic influence, or
successful pressuring of him to adopt some new and unwanted course
of foreign policy, Rather, the danger is that the PKI, with its various
foreign and domestic instruments not fully subject to Sukarno’s control,
could indyce him to proceed with established government policy—such
as the anti-Malaysia campaign—faster than he intends.

D. The Econamic Situation

17. The Indonesian economy continues to deteriorate despite the re-
moval of many of the strains generated by the West New Guinea cam-
paign. The economy suffers from severe inflationary pressures, stag-
nating production, and a critical shortage of foreign exchange. The
crisis has brought forth a need for a stabilization program at home and
for substantial foreign aid in the form of balance-of-paymenta assistance
to finance imports of raw materials, spare parts, and consumer necessi-
ties of types which the Bloc cannot adequately supply,

irate considerations haV@invariably pre-
valled over economic offés with Sukarno, but he will probably accept
some _— measures in order to obtain the ald he needs [7

Monetary Fund (IMF The IMF has
suggested a program which would require elimination of rice subsidies,
removal of certain price controls, devaluation of the currency, strict
control of credit, a substantial decrease in the milita budget, tax re-
form, and. iin te of the customs. The imports

18. Sukarno is cia a stabilization loan from the International

land the local currency which they gene d, could serve
to mitigate Some of the austerities of the stabilization program, thus
making it more acceptable to Sukarno and more tolerable to the Indo-

ro .

 

1.3(@)(4)(8)
Page-12
cA

nesian people. An important requirement

would probably be the rescheduling 0 ‘Indonesia's foreign debt
payments, including those due for Bloc arms deliveries. Of the esti-
mated $613 million arma debt to the USSR, about $30 million came due
in 1962, and the annual servicing is scheduled to rise to over $70 million
in 1965 before leveling off.

19. Some of the above requirementa|__
would be highly unpalatable to Sukarno. He would also be most un-
receptive to anything that smacked of political conditions, such as an
undertaking to mitigate his opposition to Malaysia. As to reduction
of the burden of external debt, Sukarno {s unlikely to resort to repudia-
tion. In particular, he would almost certainly feel that repudiating
Indonesia's obligations to the USSR would jeopardize further Bloc mill-
tary and economic ald and political support, and would increase Indo-
nesian dependence on the West to an undesirable degree. Some of
Sukarno’s subordinates have asked the USSR for a rescheduling of
debt repayments and seem confident that arrangements can be made.

20. Indonesia's economic plight and Sukarno’s own politico-economic
views carry the possibilities of other disagreements with the West.
Indonesia’s petroleum production is aboyt @0 percent foreign-controlled,
and foreign investment is also heavy in rubber. Sukarno is aware, how-
ever, that onalization of Western oil or rubber properties would
oper , a8 well as confronting him with major difficulties in
marketin: @ output. As contracts are renegotiated, Indonesia will
seek ever more favorable terms, but outright nationalization ia unlikely
over the next year or ao. New foreign capital Is acceptable in Indonesia,
but each new investment must be negotiated under a concept of “pro-
duction sharing” which provides for cooperative efforts with Indonesian
public or private enterprises, profit sharing, and eventual transfer to
Indonesian ownership.

Il, TRENDS IN INDONESIAN FOREIGN POLICY

A. Regional Ambitions

21. Indonesia's size and population, strategic location, and natural
wealth make it the most important country of southeast Asia. There
is a sense of national destiny at work in Djakarta that is leading to
the pursuit of regional hegemony and, ultimately, recognition as a
world power. The urgency of these ambitions is intensified by Sukarno’s
obsessive anticolonialism and by the fact that he considera most neigh-
boring states to be still under Western domination. Sukarno has often
stated that Indonesia covets no territory beyond that included in the
former Netherlands East Indies, but events in recent months cast doubt
on this affirmation. Indonesia's increased military capabilities, its suc-
cess in obtaining West New Guinea, and the evident reluctance of any

Eo

4.010406)

4.3(8)(4)(6)
Page-13
cL 4

major power to challenge it directly on that or subsequent issues have
stimulated Indonesian ambitions.

22. Malaysia, The current focus of Indonesian attention is the pro-
posed Federation of Malaysia, to whose disruption Sukarno is publicly
committed. His opposition Is couched in terms of an objection to neo-
colonialism, claiming that Malaysia will be merely a mask for continued
Western domination. The Indonesians have also expressed fears of
the eventual extension of Chinese Communist power over the new-state.
It is ltkely that Sukarno is indeed moved by these considerations, es-
pecially the former. But he also sees Malaysia as an obstacle to In-
donesian hegemony in the Malay world and to his personal ambitions
for international leadership. His emotions on the issue are intensified
by a strong personal dislike of the Malayan Prime Minister, Tunku
Abdul Rahman, whose conservative, pro-Western outlook is anathema
to him and whom he sees as a potential rival for leadership of the Malay
world. Sukarno probably also believes that a campaign against Ma-
laysia will assist, as did the West New Guinea campaign, in strengthen-
ing his political position at home.

23. Indonesian efforts to frustrate Malaysia follow two parallel
courses: support of insurrection, in Borneo and heavy political pressure
on Malaya—the proclaimed policy of “confrontation.” Covert activities
on a small’scale have been under way in the northern Borneo territories
since 1960, but Indonesian hostility toward the Federation of Malaysia
concept was not surfaced until the abortive December 1962 revolt in
Brunei, for which Indonesla provided political support, fAnancial assist-
ance, and training for a few rebel units. Sukarno will probably con-
tinue to stir up trouble in British Borneo by supplying and training
disruptive forces, hoping thereby to create enough disorder to gain the
attention of the UN and to delay federation. We do not believe, how-
ever, that Sukarno will take sufficiently strong steps to prevent the
establishment of Malaysia by the scheduled date of 31 August 1963.
Although outright military intervention is possible, it is likely that
Sukarno would be reluctant to face the UK directly and would hesitate
also to risk the damage to political and economic relations with the
US which he probably believes such intervention would cause. Even
after Malaysia is organized, however, Sukarno will not halt his efforts
to dominate the Borneo territories through subversion and the promo-
tion of internal disorders.

24. In carrying out his policy of “confrontation” with Malaya, de-
signed to pressure the Tunku and the UK into reconsidering federation,
Sukarno is also in pursuit of a broader objective. He is encouraging
the overthrow of the ruling Alliance government of Malaya in favor
of a regime that could be influenced and ultimately dominated by
Indonesia. Clandestine organs of the Indonesian Government and the
PKI are supporting both the legitimate and subversive activities of sev-

L A ’
Page-14
4.3646)
Page-15
1.9(0)(4)(6)
Page-16
|

eral leftist and pan-Malay parties in Malaya and Singapore and will
continue this support.

OC]

—

 

—s

25. Portuguese Timor. Indonesia almost. certainly intends to annex
Portuguese Timor within the next two or three years. Movements for
the “liberation” of the territory have existed in Djakarta since 1956,
and in the past year both the PKI and the Army Psychological Warfare
Section have been planning campaigns to stimulate popular interest
in the cause. Indonesia could easily and quickly seize the territory,
but will probably await circumstances that will let it pose as the pro-
tector of subject peaples and move toward the expulsion of the Portu-
guese by a combination of diplomatic, subversive, and military activity.
Incidents among the feuding border people or Portugal's policies in its
African territories could provide the pretext for Indonesian action within
the period of this estimate.

26. New Guinea. The UN is scheduled to administer West New Guinea
until at least 1 May 1063, but with tacit UN acquiescence Sukarno has
already succeeded in gaining de facto control of the territory. It is
unlikely that Indonesia intends to honor ita agreement that before
1969 it would permit an act of self-determination in the territory. At
most, ‘arno will go through the motions of assessing Papuan senti-
ment.

Indonesia may eventually undertake “anticolonial” agitation aimed .
Australian New Guinea, although probably not within the period of
this estimate. ft 4.3te)()(8)

B. Ambitions for Afro-Asian Leadership

27. The Bandung Conference of 1956 was the high point in Sukarno’s
campaign for leadership in the Afro-Asian world. Since mid-1962, he
has sought to arrange another such convocation, but has discovered
that the rapid progress of decolonization in Africa and the development
of intraregional rivalries in Asia have diminished general enthusiasm
for such gatherings. The Sino-Indian border war provided an excuse

 

12 L _|
Page-17
Cc

for shelving plans for a “Second Bandung,” but other problems inhibit
chances for success of future initiatives in this field. Indonesia is mis-
trusted in many African states. Sukarno |s viewed with personal dis-
taste by both Nasser and Nehru; indeed, Indian-Indonesian hostility
is now only thinly veiled.

Ill. FOREIGN INFLUENCES

A. The USSR

28. Indonesia offers a fertile fleld for the expansion of Communist
influence. Both the USSR and Communist China have sought to ex-
ploit this opportunity by maintaining cordial state-to-state relations
and by supporting Sukarno on major foreign issues. Thus far, the
USSR had had little difficulty in establishing its primacy in Indonesia
over Communist China, primarily because Peiping cannot match the
USSR in providing military and economic assistance. However, the
recent growth of Peiping’s influence within the PKI could, if it con-
tinues, complicate Soviet efforts to remain on close terms with Sukarno
while not jeopardizing relations with the PKI. In any event, as the
largest nation in southeast ‘Asia, a potentially important maritime
power, and the locua of the largest Communist Party outside the Bloc,
Indonesia is destined to become an arena of intense rivalry between the
two Communist powers.

29. Since 1966, when ita ald programs commenced, the Communist
Bloc has undertaken to provide an estimated $438 million in econo: ie
assistance and $1,056 million in military assistance to Indonesia. C

Of these totals, only about five percent comes from Commfu-
nist C! and more than 70 percent from the USSR. Actual drawings
of Soviet economic ald amount to only $45 million. On the other hand,
the USSR has provided an estimated credit of $613 million for military
assistance of which approximately 80 percent has been delivered, making
Indonesia the largest recipient of such assistance among the nonaligned
states?

30. Under these military aid agreements, Indonesia has received a
wide variety of modern equipment, inclu advanced aiperaft, surface-
to-air miasiles (SAMs), and submarines. we iciintiona
have been heavily concentrated in the fleld ui wir and naval equipment;

‘Hatimated value of Bloc military assistance contracts with non-Bloc countries
(1958-1062) before discount (in millions of UB dollars):

 

Indonesia . 1,000-1,100
UAR ....- 600-700
Traq . 360
Syria 250-200
Afghanistan 125
Others 10-05

L
Page-18
L J

80-80 percent of Indonesian naval equipment is of Soviet origin. Soviet
arms deliveries to Indonesia, which reached a peak just prior to the Au-
Gust 1962 West New Guinea settlement, have continued to arrive though
at a markedly slower rate, Certain Indonesian officials have become in-
creasingly concerned over the heavy fnancial burden Soviet military aid
entails and the inability of the armed forces to assimilate the equipment.
Efforts have been made to cancel some outstanding orders or to obtain
Spare parts and equipment more suitable to current requirements. Some
deliveries may have been cancelled, but the USSR has not yet shown
readiness to modify significantly existing delivery contracts.

31. Indonesia has also pressed the USSR for some sort of accommoda-
tion in payment terms. The USSR is probably willing to grant some
moratorium on current repaymenta and an extension of maturities. It
will, however, probably seek to maintain its present position by con-
tinuing to furnish the equipment for the Indonesian Armed Forces, hop-
ing to gain political and economic benefits. The USSR is likely to seek
4 larger share of such key Indonesian hard currency exports as estate
rubber and tin. The diversion of these commodities to the USSR would
Probably produce a sufficient trade surplus for Indonesia to meet debt
payments rescheduled over a longer period. Such a measure would also
weaken Indonesia's ability to earn foreign exchange in world markets
and would tie its gcanomy more closely ‘to the Bloc,

32. In Moscow's view, the gains made in drawing closer to Sukarno
and in encouraging him to embark on courses of action which prejudice
Indonesia's relations with the Weat have almost certainly justified its
military investment in Indonesta, Although the peaceful settlement of
the West New Guinea dispute waa a disappointment to the USSR, its
position in Indonesia is still a strong one. Indonesia must look to the
USSR for technical advice, training, and apare parts, to the point where
the Indonesian Navy and Air Force would be seriously crippled by with-
drawal of Soviet support. Soviet contact with alr force and naval per-
sonnel has also increaged: some 3,000 Indonesian naval officers and tech-
nicians have been trained in the USSR; in Indonesia, about 700 Soviet
advisers have been on assignment with the navy, and 650 with the air
force,

33. The interchange of officers and technicians has not modified the
military leadership's basically anti-PKI attitude, There has been rela-
tively little impact on the all-important army; only about 100 army per-
sonnel have been sent to the USSR and only a handful of Soviet advisers
are presently attached to the army. The number of Soviet military and
technical advisers in Indonesia has diminished from a peak of about
1,200 in late 1962, and, unless massive new contracts are signed, Soviet
Personnel there will probably number only 300-400, primarily missile
and submarine technicians, by the end of 1963.

" LT 4
Page-19
CL J

34, The USSR has thus far followed a policy of seeking to draw Indo-
nesia into a pro-Soviet orientation by exploiting Sukarno's differences
with the West and gradually increasing his dependence on the USSR for
political and material support. This policy permits the USSR to damage
the Western political, economic, and military position in southeast Asia
without direct Soviet involvement. Soviet policy planners may also have
considered the advantages of a more direct approach to enlarging their
influence in the area—obtaining air and naval bases on Indonesian soll.
The'Soviets might believe that the existence of a military position in the
southwest Pacific could increase their ability to support local “wars of
national liberation.” They might also expect aome political gains among
neighboring anti-Communist states from the intimidating effect of their
military presence,

35. Some superficial similarity between the military buildup in Indo-
nesia and that in Cuba, particularly the delivery of SAMs, has raised the
question whether the Soviets might install IRBMs and MRBMs in Indo-
nesia. There is as yet no evidence of such action. Our present informa-
tion on the pace of delivery and installation of SAMs and thelr proposed
deployment suggests that they are intended to protect Djakarta and
selected air bases, rather than to ahield the establishment of strategic
missile bases. Evidence to date also indicates that SAMs will be manned
by predomipantly Indonesian crewa, several of which have already com-
pleted training. From the Soviet point of view, strategic missiles in
Indonesia would not enhance Soviet striking power against the US.
The USSR, however, might see some military advantage in enlarging
its missile capability against the Malay Peninsula and Australia, The
USSR would probably calculate the chances of decisive Western action
to be substantially less than in Cuba. On the other hand, the USSR
would be reluctant to place its most sophisticated weaponry, including
nuclear warheads, within the power of the Indonesian military.

36. The USSR would probably not want to establish its own alr, naval,
or strategic missile bases in Indonesia unlesa it were more fully assured
of Sukarno’s commitment to the Bloc and of the continued loyalty to him
of his military chiefs. The Soviets probably consider that an effort to
preasure Sukarno into providing bases would jeopardize their long-range
political objectives in Indonesia. Sukarno is likely to be reluctant to
grant bases, since such a move would compromise Ingonesia’s status
among the neutralists and directly challenge the US. aa

ll things con-
sidered, we believe that under present circumstances the USSR is un-
likely to seek and Sukarno is unlikely to agree to the establishment of
Soviet bases in Indonesia. Lesser concessions are more likely, e.g., per-
mitting the USSR limited use of Indonesian alr and naval bases or

FE _ 15

1.8(@)(4)(5)
Page-20
co

installation of Soviet satellite monitoring facilities. These might serve
as entering wedges for more ambitious moves should the Malaysia dis-
pute worsen or Sukarno move closer to the Bloc.

87. Although Soviet military ald has increased Sukarno's capabilities
to challenge Western interests in southeast Asta, we do not believe that
he has yet elected to link Indonesian foreign policy irrevocably with that
of the USSR. Indonesia remains independent of Bloc contral and re-
tains its ability to bargain profitably with both East and Weat. Nor do
we believe that Sukarno will willingly sacrifice his freedom of action in
return for Soviet aid.|

 

f, however, Sukarno embarks on foreign adventures, his
freedom of action may be impaired by dependence on Soviet military sup-
port and on PKI political support at home.

8, Communist China

38. Sukarno sees Communist China as the leading Asian socialist state,
with almost identical views on colonial issues. Peiping is probably as
well satisfied with Sukarno's performancd on the international scene as
with that of any other Asian or African neutralist leader. Despite Com-
munist China's relative inability to assist Indonesia materially, state-to-
state relations have improved markedly since the 1969-1960 controversy
over the status of the Chinese minority in Indonesia.

38. While both Indonesia and Communist China will seek to maintain
and improve their Presently amicable relationship, there are potential
points of friction that could reverse this course, General dislike for the
Chinese minority remaing a latent source of tension. Communist China’s
long-range ambitions in the Malaysian area are in essential confilct with
those of Indonesia. In the short term, however, Sukarno's attitude to-
ward Communist China is more likely to be affected by Pejping's rela-
tionship with the militant faction of the PKI, Perhaps as a result of
the influence of this taction, the PKI has adopted the Chinese Commu-
nist position on major international issues. If the militant faction
gained leadership of the PKI and pressed for more vigorous exploitation
of popular grievances, Sukarno’s displeasure would probably be reflected
in cooler relations with Pelping. Any hardening of the PKI line, whether
or not inspired by the Chinese, would run counter to Moscow's present
policy of supporting Sukarno.

C. The US

40. Despite Indonesia's increasing involvement with the Bloc over
the past few years, its tradg ties have remained overwhelmingly with
the non-Communist world,

16 L 7]

13 (a)4V6)

1.8 (a9(4)(6)
Page-21
Lb a

Fhe US remains one of In-
fonesia's major trading partners, both supplier and as customer.

—
a.f{—

42. Sukarno's attitude toward” the US is mixed. Basically, he looks
on the US as the leader of the capitalist states, opposed to what he
regards as Indoneaila's legitimate ambitions at home and abroad, and
a one-time supporter of his political enemies. At the same time, he
is favorably impressed by what he interpreta as an improved US ap-
proach to colonial problems in the past two years, and he gives the
US at least some credit for helping him achieve a favorable solution
of the West New Guinea dispute. Many knowledgeable Indonesians also
omy the long-term US effort to assist the ailing Indonesian econ-
omy,

 

—

43, In recent years, US influence over Indonesian foreign policy has
been almost negligible.

| On most foreign issues Sukarno will probably continue to
mairitain hig generally pro-Bloc position [__

LL | 7

 

 

4G) Kg

1,8(a)(4)(6)

7,
aha
Page-22
4sieaye)

4.1e®)
Page-23

Page-24

Page-25
wp OMI try

Vhs CUNTRAL INILEHGENGL AGING

‘ DISSEMINATION MOTICE

‘
Fo this document was disseminated by the Central litelligenca Agency This copy
is for the information and

 

Of the tocipient and af person under his yursdichon ona

 

need ty know bu: Addhinonal essential disantnation may be authorized by the

following: officials within thet rspuctve deparinonts:

ae Director of Intelligence and Research, for tha Department of State
L. Directs, Defense Intallyence Agency, for the Ollica ob the Secretary of

   
     

 

    

 

Dolense |, .
, o& Assistant ¢ fof Stall for Intelligence, Deparhnent of the Army, for the
bog ey So LE Department ol the: Army; ‘
pee j . Sot dy Assistant Chiat of Naval Operations ‘(alligence), for the Doparinent of the
‘ . : oe Navy . ”
‘Vey Assistant Chief al Stall, tonalliqanee Usb, fer the Popartiment of the, Ale \
. a Force fe

‘ Duector for jutolligence, Jolt salt, for the Join Stott
. Director, of ntalligayce, ALC) Sf tha Atomic, aay Commrston .
i Assistant Wien Eh forties Fehia Wiraaw al Investigation .

fi
haha eR iy
heii desteoyad

P ete Ya! ‘ihe. Couttal hnalligans Agency, by.
160, CIB TY

gilt : Met
Menton Shout be: clonii

‘Departintint of Dulaney! (: ahs
" Abomic Energy Conunissio

eb
F aderal Bureau af Jnveshigation

ve .

 

Berd ee
tied 6
De ade