
Page-1
+
Page-2
Utrector of Secr,
Central NOGPIN-NOCONTRACT
. Intelligence

 

NIE 34-91

Iran Under Rafsanjani:
Seeking a New Role in
the World Community? (cnr)

Information available as of 17 October 1991 was used
in the preparation of this National Intelligence Estimate.

The following intelligence organizations participated
in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense Intelligence Agency

The National Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

The Office of Intelligence Support,
Department of the Treasury

The Director for Intelligence,

Department of Energy

also participating:

The Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Intelligence,

Department of the Naw

The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,

Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence,

Headquarters, Marine Corps

This Estimate was @pproved for publication by the
National Foreign Imelligence Board.

. Sgffer
tober 199}
Page-3
Se ee
Page-4
Seer
NOFGSYV-NOCONTRACT

 

 

4 ,

 

Key Judgments _.

lran Under Rafsanjani: oe
Seeking a New Role in 4

the World Community?
President Rafsanjani’s initiative to improve Iran’s standing with the world

community will continue to be at least partly successful over the next two
years. We see further gains for Iran in terms of rebuilding financial and
political ties in the Gulf and in Western Europe. Such successes may help
Rafsanjani satisfy, at least in the near term, domestic demands for an
improved standard of living, which drive his foreign policy. Continued
promotion of militant Islam, ties to terrorist groups, and resistance even
from within the ruling circle will cause occasional setbacks to Rafsanjani’s
foreign policy initiatives. At the same time, Iran will continue spending on
its rearmament program, including research and development on weapons
of mass destruction, as part of its efforts to reconstruct its strategic
military position in the region#*:

 

 

Rafsanjani’s goals vis-a-vis the United States are to reduce bilateral
tensions and US economic and political pressures on Iran and to limit US
military presence and political influence in the Persian Gulf. Rafsanjani
would like to resolve issues such as hostages, economic and arms embar-
goes, and to eliminate US pressure in international forums over terrorism
and human rights issues. On hostages, we believe Rafsanjani feels little
time pressure to solve the problem immediately, but we do think he intends
to free all those under Iranian control. Overall, Iran will continue to be
wary of the United States. Ideology and strategic considerations will
dictate continued friction between Iranian and US interests Jy

 

Domestic Factors—Manageable

During the next two years of his presidential term, Rafsanjani will prevent
his radical opposition from derailing his pragmatic foreign and domestic
policies, Rafsanjani and Supreme Leader Khamenei want to avoid a
confrontation with their opponents to preserve the unity of the clerical and
political establishments. Nonetheless, Iran's leadership is politically stron-
ger than when it first assumed office in 1989. Rafsanjani and Khamenei
will resort to “hardball” political tactics and even coercion when necessary.

iii

 

: ————— Srl ll
Page-5
(EC), countries and Japan and has had some success

 

Pome

Rafsanjani’s greatest domestic challenge will be to promote economic
reform rapidly enough to improve living conditions without provoking
widespread civil unrest. His promises and attempts at reform have raised
expectations of economic improvement that will be difficult to meet in the
next two years. Nonetheless, even modest amounts of foreign trade
financing and investment, combined with the lack of alternative leadership
to the clerical regime, make it unlikely that the Iranian public will become
so disillusioned with economic policies to turn against Rafsanjani in the
Next two years

Toward a More Pragmatic Foreign Policy

Iran is gradually adopting a more conventional foreign policy that
emphasizes pursuit of practical state interests over ideology. This new
approach does not portend a benign Iran—it will continue to use confronta-
tional or other intimidating tactics when it believes they advance Iranian
interests, but it does represent a trend in which Iran will be more sensitive
to the costs of its violent behavior. (S NF) . 7

Rafsanjani has focused on improving relations with European Community

 

In the Middle East and Southwest Asia, Iran still seeks recognition as a
regional power. During the time frame of this Estimate, Iran will pursue a
primarily diplomatic strategy to assert its regional influence, particularly
with Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states, where it will also seek,
probably unsuccessfully in the short run, new security relationships. Iran
will seek to shape postwar relations in the Gulf in ways that emphasize
Iranian leadership, isolate Iraq, prevent the reemergence of an Arab bloc
directed against Iran, and limit the role of the United States in regional se-
curity. Tehran will continue its efforts to take advantage of Iraq’s postwar
weakness and the declining Soviet involvement in Afghanistan.

 

Iran will try to extend its influence among Muslims in the USSR, but we
believe that Iran is disadvantaged in this effort as compared with Turkey
and Saudi Arabia. Modern nationalists in the Soviet Muslim republics are
likely to be more attracted to Turkey's secular, democratic system, while
most traditional Sunni Muslims probably will look more favorably on the
more orthodox—and wealthier—Saudis@
Page-6
Sec
NQGGPN-NOCONTRACT

 

Contents

Key Judgments iti
Discussion 1
Introduction 1
The Internal Situation: Tran’s Slow Return to Normaicy 1
Decline of the Radicals L
The Role of the Economy—Rafsanjani’s Tightrope Act 2
Is the Revolution Over? 4
At Home: Revolutionary Rhetoric, Greater Pragmatism 4
Abroad: Nationalism and Khomeini’s Legacy 5
Iran's Foreign Policy : 6
Guiding Principles 6
8

 

 

 

Persian Gulf

Non-Gulf Arabs 13
Relations With Turkey, Pakistan, Afghanistan: The Northern Tier 14
Reaching Out to the European Community, Japan, and China 15

 

Iran and the Soviet Union: Uncertain Future

__Iran and the United States: Dealing With the Last
Page-7
PN-NOCONTRACT

 

Discussion’. =

Introduction

Since Ayatollah Khomeini’s death two years ago,
President Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani and Su-
preme Leader Ali Hoseini-Khamenei have successful-
ly isolated and weakened their extremist opponents
and pursued relatively pragmatic domestic and for-
eign policies. Barring the assassination or removal of
Rafsanjani or the collapse of the Iranian economy,
their hold on power seems secure for the two-year
period of the Estimate.”

This Estimate examines Iranian foreign policy in light
of two dramatic events that have made Iran less

important to the United States and less able to harm
ital US interests. First, eight years of war with Tra

   

   

pt _’.»have enfeebled Iran’s military
power as well as its economic resources. During the
two-year period of this Estimate, Iran will continue to
lack the means to project power in ways that it once
could. Second, the continuing upheaval in the USSR
has basically altered our assumptions about Soviet
power and intentions; there is diminished US concern
Ct Soviet ambitions toward Iran and the Gulf.

Nonetheless, [ran retains great potential to be a
regional power because of its size, its resource base,
its location, and its ability to disrupt Western access
to the Gulf’s oil supplies. We also believe that Iran
has ambitions to recapture its influence and power in
the region and to redefine its role in Central Asia in
light of changes in the Soviet Union and Afghanistan.
While some recent changes provide opportunities for
Iran, its leadership must also feel challenged by the
improved US position in the Arab world and by the
apparent end of superpower rivalry in the Third
Word

sean ‘amines Iran's foreign policy over the next two
years, 5

 

= and increase its own power

The Internal Situation: Iran’s Slow Return
to Normalcy

Decline of the Radicals
Iran has been graduaily turning away from the
revolutionary excesses of the past decade and has been
moving toward more conventional behavior. The work
of consolidating the clerical regime and Islam’s role in
public life is largely accomplished; Tehran is becom-
ing more concerned with worldly issues such as
Promoting economic growth. This transition, in part,
reflects the natural maturing of the revolution and the
exhaustion of political fervor after more thah a decade
of revolution and war; it also represents a deliberate
effort by the regime to address ae 5

  

We expect this transition to continue—and perhaps
even to accelerate especially after the Maijles elec-
tion—during the next two years, although the clerical
regime will retain much of the outlook and rhetoric of
the revolution. The pattern of Iranian political behav-
ior for the next several years is likely to exhibit three
dominant trends:

+ A policy agenda emphasizing pragmatism over
ideological purity. Rafsanjani is a Strong nationalist
motivated primarily by considerations of national
and personal self-interest. In his first Friday sermon
following his assumption of the presidency, Rafsan-
jani set the tone of his administration by maintaining
that achieving a better standard of living is a goal of
Islam, a theme that contrasts with Khomei
frequent emphasis on self-denial and admonitions
against consumerism.

The regularization of government functions. Raf-
sanjani and Khamenei will continue to Strengthen
formal government institutions at the expense of
quasi-governmental revolutionary organs. The re-
gime has subordinated to the Defense Ministry the
Page-8
I

formerly independent Islamic Revolutionary Guards
Corps (IRGC) and has taken Steps to professionalize
the corps. Similarly, the unpopular komitehs—a
revolutionary police organ and power base for politi-
cal radicalism—has been merged with the more
apolitical Gendarmerie and National Police,

The consolidation of power in the hands of
Rafsanjani, Khamenei, and their political allies,
Rafsanjani and Khamenei have gradually replaced
hardline revolutionaries in key government positions
with their own supporters. For example, the Chief of
the Judiciary is a conservative cleric and Khamenei
appointee, Most of the cabinet and high-level mili-
tary commanders are new appointees who share
their views on the best way to solve Iran's problems,

Rafsanjani’s adversaries—his critics in the Islamic
Consultative Assembly (Majles), radical student orga-
nizations, and newspapers controlled by hardliners—
advocate strict adherence to hardline views they attri-
bute to Khomeini. They support state control of the
economy, rigorous enforcement of revolutionary
codes—particularly against the wealthy or Western-
oriented elements—and an uncompromisingly con-
frontational policy against the West in general and
the United States in particular. Their calls for contin-
ued Tevolutionary purity, self-sacrifice, and continued
confrontation with the West increasingly fall on
weary and unreceptive ears.

The general population is tired of war and revolution
and preoccupied with its declining standard of living.
The armed forces, including the IRGC, were greatly
weakened by the war with Iraq and are unlikely to
intervene in favor of the extremists. Barring a major
economic collapse for which Rafsanjani is blamed, his
opponents will not be able to mobilize significant
popular or military Support for their radical agenda.

Rafsanjani is continuing to hone his already consider-
able skills at manipulating and neutralizing the oppo-
sition. Along with Khamenei, Rafsanjani will contin-
ue to use a mix of co-optation, persuasion, and

coercion to divide their adversaries and exclude them

fi

 

from important government posts. They almost cer-
tainly will use whatever tactics Necessary to ensure
that a pro-Rafsanjani majority will be elected to the
Majles in the next election scheduled for early 1992.
Rafsanjani and Khamenei would Prefer to avoid a
confrontation with the radicals and may allow some
Prominent hardliners to retain their Seats, thus provid-
ing a safety valve for them to express their views. Tf,
however, the radicals remain unsatisfied and resort to
demonstrations, sedition, and acts of Political vio-
lence, the leadership would not hesitate to use hard-
ball tactics against cone

The Role of the Economy—Rafsanjani’s
Tightrope Act

Political turmoil, the war with Iraq, decliniag oil
earnings, and general economic mismanagement dur-
ing the 1980s have taken their toll on Iran's economy.
Social problems, especially the severe brain drain
following the revolution and unprecedented popula-
tion growth, have resulted in additional drags on the
economy. These pressures have led Rafsanjani to look
increasingly to the West for help. He is trying to
attract new investment and obtain the critical techni-
cal expertise for development programs as well as
loans to ease the country’s financial burdens. He has
achieved some modest gains: Tehran has signed new
Contracts with Western companies, particularly in the
oil, gas, and related industries, although other inves-
tors may wait for the outcome of the Majles election
in early 1992 before committing significant resources
to Iran’s economy, Rafsanjani has also begun imple-
menting a number of economic liberalization mea-
sures—many at the behest of the International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank—to revive the
economy and regain investor confidence. His initia-
tives include unifying the multiple exchange rates and
devaluing the rial, selling a number of state-run
companies, and removing subsidies on most basic
commodities. Rafsanjani also directed an almost 50-
percent expansion in government expenditures, main-
ly for domestic consumption—more than doubling its
Page-9
1a
AB ale sult 233

 
 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Promise of Inflation
better living :
conditions High cost of
living
© Longing fora
piece of bread
eat or ar . a
Bap Beh AS ee ule ul or ol eel she ee
el ae

 

 

   

 

 
 
 

teat pun

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

  

te SSF
Fiist Vice President: some high pric * Dozens of beggars
- are merely experimental 2.) 2.7) ar€ picked up across
: .e city of Tehran.

 

 
  

PT swear P'm nora

‘beggar! Fhave a job
Page-10
external debt to over $10 billion, according to West-
ern press reports—to breathe life into Iran's industrial
sector, expand nonoil exports, and meet pent-up de-
mand for consumer goods...

 

 

We believe Rafsanjani will push ahead with his
reform program; if he fully implements those reforms
begun in the current $120 billion five-year plan and if
oil prices do not decline, Iran could achieve modest
growth over the medium term, following the economic
recovery begun in 1989. Nonetheless, improvements
in both the underlying structural problems and in
living conditions for the average Iranian will be hard
to achieve in the next two years. Higher earnings from
oil sales would allow Iran to increase imports and
push forward on some reconstruction projects but
would not address the dependence of the domestic
economy on oil and the price and exchange rate
distortions, and they would not stimulate domestic
caving i

Economic problems are unlikely to threaten Rafsan-
jani’s position over the next two years. His opponents
have not effectively exploited economic issues; most
Iranians probably view his economic reform package
as preferable to the hardliners’ calls for continued
revolutionary austerity. Domestic unrest over high
prices, removal of subsidies, and housing shortages
appear to be local and largely spontaneous outbursts
that the regime can handle. Iran is also seeking IMF
help in developing a safety net, which would help
buffer the poor from some of the adverse effects of
reform. For the present, we believe that the political
exhaustion of Iranians from a decade of revolution
and war, the regime's ability to suppress dissent, and
the absence of a viable alternative leadership to the
clerics will limit the threat posed to Rafsanjani from

public dissatisfaction over living condition 3

Is the Revolution Over?

At Home: Revolutionary Rheteric,

Greater Pragmatism

Rafsanjani and Khamenei will not abandon the basic
values of the 1978-79 revolution: the reassertion of
Islam as a central characteristic of the Iranian identi-
ty and Iranian policy, direct clerical participation in

 

 

Lf Rafsanjani Left the Scene Abruptly

We believe that Rafsanjani’s sudden departure
from the scene would not result in unrest,
turmoil, or a dramatic change in the basic
tenets of Iran's current economic and foreign
policies. Supreme Leader Khamenei and other
key regime officials are likely to pursue similar
policies, albeit probably more deliberately than
with Rafsanjani at the helm. Rafsanjani's abili-
ties as Iran’s foremost policy formulator, how-
ever, would undoubtedly be missed. Hardline
elements might try to seize such an opportunity
to regain some of their lost stature, but their
influence on Iranian decisionmaking has ebbed
to a point that we doubt they would be able to
mount a credible challenge to any pragmatic
candidate Khamengpgupported as a repldce-
ment to Rafvansarie, .

 

Under the provisions of the 1989 revised Consti-
tution, the apolitical Vice President, Hasan
Ebrahim Habibi, would head a caretaker gov-
ernment after receiving Supreme Leader Kha-
menei’s approval. The Supreme Council for
National Security—comprised of the regime's
top leadership—would likely become the main
decisionmaking body until a new presidential
election was held, at which time a prominent
regime figure close to Khamenei, such as Judi-
ciary head Ayatollah Mohammad Ali Yazdi,
would likely be elected the new preside

 

 

 

 

politics, and, perhaps most important, a zealous effort
to defend Iranian independence from real or perceived
foreign infiuenceff 3
At the same time, we see the reemergence of tradi-
tional patterns of Iranian behavior and the redefini-
tion of revolutionary values into a more elastic frame-
work for Iranian policy. One characteristic is the
growing concern with more worldly issues. This con-
cern reflects the maturing of the revolution; it also is
Page-11
Figure 3. Cartoon character put into proper
hejab by Iranian censors, from Tehran Times,
20 August 1991" °°

being forced on. the regime by the seriousness of its
economic plight and its international isolation. Re-
porting from Tehran suggests that the revolutionary
ardor of the Iranian public is cooling. For example,
the public is more willing to test the tolerance of the
regime for more liberal social expression; and, for a
return to traditional Persian cultural norms, the re-
gime appears to alternate between cycles of greater
tolerance and more rigorous enforcement of Islamic
norms. Any Iranian government—even one dominat-
ed by advocates of continued revolutionary purity—
would have to hew to a more pragmatic policy to
address [ran’s problems and retain the support of a
population struggling to cope with declining living
standards and weary of political crusades. One of
Rafsanjani’s strengths is that he sensed this change
sarly and positioned himself to take advantage of it.

Iranian clergy will continue to dominate government
decisionmaking for at least the time frame of this
Estimate and probably for many years beyond. Hay-
ing struggled to obtain political power—and having

 

  

 

no serious rivals for power==thésé clerics are not
likely to withdraw quietly from politics. The emphasis
on practical solutions, however, will open greater
opportunities for laymen to rise to prominent positions
in the government; this has already been observed in
Rafsanjani’s cabinet, although the government insti-
tutions most directly concerned with the security of
the regime—the Intelligence Ministry and the Interi-
or Ministry—are both headed by clerics. In addition,
that portion of the clerical establishment that supports
Rafsanjani and Khamenei tends to represent a more
traditional, less activist outlook regarding clerical
participation in government. This outlook may pro-
vide an additional impulse to include more laymen in
government."

Abroad: Nationalism and Khomeini’s Legacy

Iranian nationalism will become a stronger force in
Tranian foreign policy but will not replace fslam as a
theme and rallying cry. Nationalist themes will be
blended with Islamic ones, producing a more supple
message. This fusion will be most clearly expressed in
Iranian foreign policy 7

The regime, however, still pays homage to Khomeini’s
legacy, and this will limit its abil
flexible policies: a

 

 

   

 

Rafsanjani’s general effort to adapt revolutionary
principles to practical considerations of state will
lessen but not end Iran’s support to militant [slamic
groups abroad. The advancement of revolutionary
Islam underpins the legitimacy of the clerical regime
and Iran’s self-perceived role as the “focal point of
Islam” provides the moral justification for its policies.
Rafsanjani and Khamenei have, as in domestic policy,
sought to emphasize those precedents of Khomeini’s

 

oo”
Page-12
that allow them to redefine export of the revolution in
a way more compatible with the conduct of a prag-
matic foreign policy. Specifically, they have publicly
argued that Iran will export the revolution “by exam-
ple,” that is, by building a more perfect Islamic
society in Iran that will inspire and encourage Mus-
lims elsewhere to emulate the Islamic Republic

Iranian attempts to exploit Islamic politics will be
opportunistic. Iran’s search for prestige as the leader
of militant Islam will cause it to intrude.in the
internal affairs of others on at least rhetorical and
diplomatic levels in many disputes in which they think
Muslim rights are being threatened—for instance,
when it condemned French and Turkish bans on the
wearing of conservative Islamic clothing at state
schools, or in its persistent calls for the independence

of Kesh OY

Iranian material support for Sunni as well as Shia
fundamentalists will continue during the next two
years, although Tehran will be careful that such
actions will not undermine other national interests.
Tehran's interests in improving ties to the GCC states
and its knowledge that efforts to stir up the Shia in
the Arab Gulf states would wreck any rapprochement
have apparently caused Tehran to back off support for
Shia or Sunni dissidents in the Gulf. In both Pakistan
and Turkey, however, Iran has continued to support
fundamentalist groups without severely damaging its
state-to-state relations e Se

     

ret

 

   

Iran’s Foreign Policy

Guiding Principles

Iran’s major foreign policy goal is to foster a more
stable regional environment conducive to Iranian se-
curity and economic development. Tehran also is
seeking to expand its diplomatic relations both in the
region and globally as a means of increasing its
influence and reclaiming the role of a regional power.
Foreign policy will still be based on principles of
nonalignment and Iran’s own “neither East nor West”
approach, although these concepts may need to be
modified in light of changed circumstances!

 

Rafsanjani apparently hopes to maximize Iran’s free-
dom of action. His public statements suggest that
Rafsanjani perceives greater opportunity fer Itan to

- advance its interests—and preserve its indépen-

dence—by playing foreign powers against each other
and preventing their united action against Iran, such
as international sanctions. Iranian policy will continue
to seek to exploit to Iran’s benefit the political and
commercial competition among foreign governments
with interests in the region, although regional and
global political changes—especially the end of the
Cold War—will limit és" of this time-

 

honored Iranian tactic.

 

Iran is gradually adopting more conventional policies
that emphasize pursuit of practical state interests over
ideology, Rafsanjani, and, to a lesser extent, Kha-
menei recognize that Iran has paid a price because of
its confrontational, dogmatic policies, and they are
seeking to repair the damage. One important goal will
be to persuade the international community—espe-
cially the West—that Iran is once again a responsible
country, or, as Foreign Minister Velayati stressed to
Italian officials last year, that “Iran is a serious
nation.” This apparent flexibility does not necessarily
portend a benign Iran; it will be more sensitive to its
image and to the costs of its violent behavior but will
continue to use violent or intimidating tactics when it
believes they advance Iranian interests. @ +
Page-13
Less Likely Scenario—A More Dangerous Iran

This Estimate's judgment that Iran will not seri-
ously threaten US interests over the next two years
is based on the following assumptions:

* The strategic importance of Iran has been deval-
ued by the end of the Cold War and the decline

of Soviet power.

* The Rafsanjani-Khamenei alliance is growing
stronger domestically, and it believes Iranian
interests are better served by more conventional
behavior and better relations with the West.

* The grave weakness of the Iranian economy,
coupled with the limited capabilities af Iran's
armed forces, ensure that for the next two years
Iran will not be capable af posing a serious
threat—other than a terrorist.one—to us
interests.

+ Iran is further. deterred from belligerent.behav-
ior by the repercussions af Desert Storm.and
Tran’s perception that the United States would
take Stggng measures against aggression. in the
oes"

  

   

A more dangerous Iran, however, could emerge in

the mid-to-late 1990s with @ resurgence of Iranian

power and aggressiveness, particularly if the re~

gional environment.is conducive, by such develop-

ments as:

+ A collapse ofthe balance of power i in the Gulf
through chaos in Iraq.

+ Serious unrest in the smaller Gulf states.

« Emergence af a more radical regime in Tehran.

 
 
  

In such circumstances:

* Tehran might be tempted to intervene to install a
Shia government in Baghdad, to “protect” the Shia
holy sites in southern Iraq, and to bully the GCC
states. Even if Iraq does not fall into disorder, [ran's
efforts to stimulate and sustain a Shia insurgency in
Iraq could lead it to také more aggressive actions
toward Baghdad—most likely covert action as in
March-April 1991—that might, through miscalcu-
lation, lead to @ broader clash with Iraq.

+ Iran could meddle in the small Gulf states. Interven-
tion in Bahrain or Kuwait is possible. Making
claims to Qatari.oilfields is also an Iranian objective
that a.more * aggressive government might_pursue,

 

. Iran could pressure 2 the small Gulf countries to
end their bilateral security agreements with the
United States:

  

* Iran could expand its involvement in Lebanon,
directly or through surrogates, thus projecting a
role in the peace Process arena...

 

 

+ Iran could become more aggressive in pressing
its demands in.OPEC for higher oil Prices.

  

* An more radical governmerit ‘would be likely to

" engage in terrorism against.US. and Western
targets and to encourage. th violent export of
Islamic revolution:

 

 

Iran might also become more aggressive in Central
Asia and the Caucasus if its relations with Soviet
central authority. attenuate so°much that it no longer
feels constrained by the need:to maintain good ties
to Moscow. In particular, the emergence of a sizable
and viable Islamist: movement: in one.or more of the
former Soviet republics: might-prompt Iran to more
active support af Islamic revolutionary activities in
the former Soviet Union. Alternatively, the emer-
gence of outright hostile governments in the former
Soviet republics—especially if they maintained close
relations with Ankara or Riyadh—might be consid-

ered a threat in: Tehran and provoke active Jranign
efforts to undermine the new government. 5
Page-14
Persian Gulf
Iran seeks recognition as the dominant power in the
Persian Gulf. We believe [ran views the outcome of
the 199! Gulf war as a net plus and, in particular, as
an opportunity to regain what it regards as its tradi-
tional position of preeminence in the region. Iraq's
invasion of Kuwait shattered the Arab solidarity with
Baghdad that had isolated Iran in the region, and the
destruction of much of Iraq’s military machine in
Operation Desert Storm ended Baghdad’s strategic
ascendancy in the Persian Gulf. On the other hand,
the rise in US presence, influence, and prestige in the
region as a result of the war will deter Iran from
pursuing its ambitions boldly

   

Tehran will take advantage of the decline of Trag to
expand its relations in the area. Rafsanjani.probably
accepts that he cannot in the short term reverse:
Washington's enbanced influence, and he will try to
limit it. Iran will seek to shape postwar relations in
the Gulf in ways that emphasize Iranian leadership,
isolate Iraq, prevent the reemergence of an Arab bloc
directed against Iran, and limit the role of the United
States in regional security. Iran’s diplomatic strategy
will probably follow the general lines sketched by
Rafsanjani in a public sermon in March 1991, in
which he presented Iranian views of regional security.
The main points included:

Fostering regional unity in the Persian Gulf based
on Islam and shared interests in stability and eco-
nomic development.

Increased cooperation among Gulf countries in eco-
nomic fields—particularly oil prices—the peaceful
resolution of disputes, and noninterference in inter-
nal affairs.

Resistance to any effort by either a regional country
or the United States to impose hegemony on the
region, although Iran, as the ‘focal point of the
region and standard bearer of, yo would

“be the leading regional power

To date, Iran’s postwar efforts with GCC states have
borne some fruit. The GCC has been more receptive
than before Iraq's defeat to engage in dialogue with

   

Iran, although it prefers to keep security matters last
on the agenda. Oman and the emirate Dubayy appear
more open than other GCC states to including Iran in
future Gulf security relations.|

 

 

Saudi Arabia. Key to.the success of Iran's efforts to
shape postwar Gulf relations in its favor will be the
fostering of a constructive relationship with Saudi
Arabia. Tehran’s diplomatic efforts since August
1990—especially the peaceful participation of more
than 100,000 Iranian pilgrims in the 1991 hajj—
suggest it is seriously pursuing such a relationship.
Foreign Minister Velayati has declared the new
Tranian-Saudi ties a “strategic relationship,” and
Tehran has made efforts to consult with Riyadh on
both oil and regional policies He. 4

The Iranian-Saudi rapprochement will remain fragile,
however: Iran and Saudi Arabia are still rivals for
religious and political influence in the Muslim
world—the clergy in both countries share a mutual
disdain for each other as schismatics Tg e caree

   
 

 

 

  

 

 

..A Struggle to influence

the succession in Iraq, should Saddam Husayn fall, or

the eruption of serious unrest among the Saudi Shia

minority also might revive Iranian-Saudi enmity and
confrontation. In the longer term, if Iran successfully
rebuilds its power, me! view Iran as an

even more serious threat.'

Jrag. Iran's relations with its rival Iraq are likely to
remain strained. As a consequence of the sharp
reduction of Iraqi military power and political influ-
ence in the Gulf, Tehran will conduct a more assertive
policy toward Baghdad, including a demand for ex-
tensive war reparations. Iran hopes that implementa-
tion of UN Security Council resolution 598 will result
in Iraq’s being branded the aggressor, thus providing
the legal basis for reparations claims. The resolution
would also formalize concessions Saddam made in
August 1990—including the evacuation of Iranian
territory, the repatriation of Iranian prisoners, and the
Page-15
Figure 4
Iran’s Expanded Regional Ties Since August 1999

 

  

EEF Restored relations
HEE Opened interest section
MME Upgraded to Ambassador

Cc J 59

 

 

o
\
spacers
Page-16
Packs 16
TH@aucd 12 ACE

Grane CoO) (y) Cs)
Page-17
division of the Shatt al-Arab according to the 1975 Stress. Muslim solidarity and-Islamic principles. Iran
Algiers accord. Iran is not likely to return soon Iraq's _ also will try to gain influence with local fundamental-
military aircraft, granted safehaven in Iran during the ists, although it will try to avoid damaging their

Gulf war. © ~ 7 relations with Arab governments in the roc

   

In particular, Iran has taken advantage of Iraq’s
postwar weakness to attempt to resubordinate Iraq to
Iran in the regional pecking order, while stopping
short of measures that would threaten Iraq’s territori-
al integrity. Tehran is working to oust Saddam Hu-
sayn from power, in hopes of replacing him with a
weaker government more susceptible to Iranian influ- ee a an
ence. Ideally, Tehran would like to see a Shia- . _Jrehran’s ideological antipa-
dominated regime take power in Baghdad, but, calcu- thy to Israel, its willingness to champion the Palestin-

 

   

  
 
  

lating that any successor regime will be weaker and ian cause, and a perception that Israel, as a US ally,

more pliable than Saddam, Tehran probably would represents a geostrategic threat to Iran all serve to

recognize almost anyone who could seize power in _ reinforce Iran's hardline opposition to a negotiated
meg, Pepe . ee peace with Israel and support for radical Palestinians.

 

Baghdad {+ Los
* : We believe Iran will take active measures.to under-

mine Israeli-Palestinian reconciliation, including US-

supported peace efforts.)

 

oe a ° a a el Lebanon. Tehran will seek to maintain influence in
Tehran will also continue to take a hardline position | Lebanonf... 8a -
in support of UN sanctions on Ira . :

   

   

Rafsanjani and Khamenei—and, indeed, most Irani-
ans—do not want to re-ignite the Iran-Iraq war or
dismember Iraq. Iran demonstrated its restraint
when, during the Shia revolt in Iraq, it limited its
public response to Saddam’s destruction of Shia
shrines and the arrest of Grand Ayatollah Khu’i to
diplomatic and religious protests. Such restraint may
well also reflect Iran’s sense of the limits of its power.
Concern about the “Lebanonization” of Iraq—and
the implications for Iran’s own minorities—almost
certainly will ensure that Tehran will not promote the.
founding of an independent Shia or Kurdish state on
Iraqi territory.‘

 

   

 

Non-Culf Arabs

Tran has few vital interests in the broader Arad world
“but is likely to continue its general efforts to expand
its influence with Arab states outside the Gulf. Dur-
ing the Gulf crisis, Iran restored or improved its
diplomatic relations with several Arab states, primari-
ly the GCC, but also Jordan, Tunisia, and Egypt.
Tranian policy in the broader Arab world is likely to

 

13 Sefer
Page-18
ra

Syria. [ran will be especially keen to retain strong ties
to Syria, which has long been its closest ally in the
Arab world and which shares Iran’s antipathy for
Saddam’s regime in Baghdad. Tehran has exhibited
this interest in its close consultations with the Syri-
ans—Asad visited Tehran in September 1990, and
Rafsanjani visited Damascus in early 1991—and in
its willingness, albeit borne in part by necessity, to
defer to Syrian wishes in Lebanon. But Syria’s efforts
to move closer to the West, its role in the postwar
GCC-Plus Two Damascus accords, its announced
willingness to participate in an Arab-Israeli peace
conference, and its support for the reconstitution of
the Lebanese state under the Ta’if accords will erode
relations somewhat. A successful negotiated settle-
ment between Syria and Israel, or Iranian success in
installing a militant Islamic government in Iraq,
would deal a serious, perhaps fatal, blow to Syrian-
Iranian relations, while the opposite—a breakdown in
Arab-Israeli peace efforts or Saddam's retention of
Power— would serve to keep Iran’s ties to Syria
strong :

Relations With Turkey, Pakistan, Afghanistan:

The Northern Tier

In the northern tier, Iran has tried to construct a web
Of relations to prevent its isolation from the region and
the outside world, to limit access to Tran by Iranian
dissidents in exile, and to gain regional support to
balance the potential emergence of an Arab bloc
directed against Iran. In particular, Tehran has fo-
cused on the Economic Cooperation Organization
(ECO)—a trilateral body formed in 1985 and com-
prised of Turkey, Tran, and Pakistan—as a vehicle for
expanding cooperation among the northern tier states.
Although the collapse of both Iraqi power and Arab
solidarity has reduced the immediate need for broad
trilateral cooperation, Tehran is advocating that the
ECO broaden its charter from strictly economic af-
fairs to facilitate trilateral Cooperation on politica!
and security issues. This is likely to be a continuing
theme in Iranian regional relations, independent of
Iranian efforts to construct a more cooperative rela-
tionship with the Arab Gulf states, a

et

Turkey. Despite bitter criticism from hardliners, Raf-
sanjani accords high Priority to maintaining good
relations with Turkey. Tehran's need to coordinate
with Ankara if it is to isolate Iraq will be a further
incentive to maintaining good relations. These factors
probably are sufficient to Prevent a dramatic deterio.
ration in Turkish-[ranian relations in the next few
years. Turkey has steadfastly resisted Iranian efforts
to involve the ECO in political and security issues,
and it remains suspicious of continued Iranian support
to Turkish fundamentalists and the Provision of safe-
haven and support to Turkish Kurdish guerrillas. The
Iranians, for their part, distrust Turkey’s ties to
NATO and the United States, suspect Ankara has
irredentist claims toward northern Iraq, and have
disdain for Turkey’s secular ideology. Both countries
will see value in boosting trade, but their uncomple-
mentary economies will limit this while more grandi-
ose schemes—such as the oft-discussed franian gas
pipeline through Turkey—will probably founder for

lack of capital

 

Pakistan. Iran’s relations with Pakistan will deepen
over the next two years. Iran sees Pakistan as another
useful non-Arab source of support in the region, while
Pakistan looks to Iran as a Muslim power capable of
helping Pakistan resist Indian Pressure. Iran also
shares an interest in helping the Afghan resistance
gain political power in Kabul, although this has
proved a source of division since each side tends to
aggressively advance the interests of its clients in the
resistance to the exclusion of the others. Political
relations are likely to be relatively cordial in the next
few years, and both countries will look for ways to
increase trade and economic Cooperation, both bilater-
ally and within the framework of the ECO, Neverthe-
less, Tehran’s perception that Pakistan does not ade-
quately protect Pakistani Shias will continue to be an
irritant in their relations.

 

Cooperation between Iran and Pakistan is likely to
grow most in the field of defense matters because both
sides find such cooperation valuable and each has
Page-19
something to offer the other. Military consultations
have increased steadily since 1989, and commanders
and working-level delegations have exchanged infor-
mation during frequent visits. Islamabad wants com-
mitments from Tehran for ammunition, fuel, and the
use of its eastern airfields and port facilities for
safehaven in the event of a war with India. It also
hopes Iran will agree to joint defense production and
to share chemical warfare technology. Tehran values
strong security ties to Pakistan and hopes—probably
vainly—they will ultimately lead Islamabad to share
its nuclear weapons and missile technology. Iran could
also benefit from Pakistan's experience in overhauling
military equipment and sees Pakistan as a conduit for
obtaining embargoed Western military spares and
equipment, despite Istamabad's assurances to Wash-
ington that it will not permit such transfers. The
August 1991 succession of Pakistani Army chief Beg
with an officer less enthusiastic about close relations
with the IRGC will probably slow the pace of defense
cooperation during the time frame of this Estimate,
but it will not alt the general trend toward closer
military ties IP. §
Afghanistan. Tehran's policy toward Afghanistan will
focus on securing the establishment of a stable Islam-
ic government in Kabul that includes a strong voice
for Afghan Shias and that minimizes US, Saudi, and
Communist influence. Tehran has already worked—
with limited success—to unify the Shia resistance
groups under its tutelage. In July and August 1991,
Iran attempted to work with Pakistan to influence the
Shia and Sunni Afghan resistance to consider the UN
Secretary General's Proposal for establishing a cease-
fire and interim administration in Afghanistan lead-
ing to elections. When a new government comes to
power in Kabul, Tehran is likely to work hard to build
relations with the new regime, providing such aid as it
can—mostly token offers of Iranian “expertise-—and
looking to the Shia as an avenue of influence

Reaching Out to the European Community,

Japan, and China

During the past two years, Rafsanjani has successful-
ly improved relations with Western Europe, Japan,
and China, and he will want to Preserve and build on

15

 

 

these successes. He has ineréased diplomatic and
commercial exchanges with the major European pow.
ers, most notably France and Germany, but also with
Italy and the United Kingdom. Tehran also has
resumed relations with London in September 1999 to
help pave the way for the lifting of the European
Community’s ban on high-level contacts with Iran,
and, since then, Foreign Minister Velayati has visited
the major EC capitals and several EC ministers have
visited Tehran. Relations with Japan have also im-
proved, with Tokyo likely to invest in some Iranian
development projects. Trade with Western Europe,
Japan, and China jumped some 65 percent last year to
about $19.5 billion. Germany, Japan, Italy, and
France also have e"§ expanded their medium-
term credit lines. .

Tehran is especially interested in the Europeans and
the Japanese as sources of financing and.modern
technology. The Iranian leadership probably views the
EC countries and Japan as less likely than the United
States to try to exploit diplomatic or economic rela-

“tons to undermine the regime or to link commercial

relations to changes in Iranian behavior. The West
Europeans and the Japanese also may take on greater
political importance to Iran as Soviet power rapidly
declines and Tehran looks for new partners to serve as
counterweights to US influence. Tehran has already
identified France as one Power that might use its
diplomatic and economic influence to counter Wash-
ington, and from time to time Germany, Japan, or the
European Community age also touted for that role in
the Iranian press . 4

Iran is also turning to China for Support in opposing
US primacy in the world. Tehran hosted Premier Li
Peng in early July and issued a joint communique-that
stressed common opposition to “one or another
power” dominating the new international political
order. In a similar vein, a Tehran newspaper stressed
the “decisive” role China, as a permanent member of
the UN Security Council, could layin support of
“the oppressed nations’ rents

z
Page-20
»

 

Iran and the Soviet Union: Uncertain Future

The dissolution of the Soviet Union will pose one of
the most difficult problems for [ranian foreign policy
during the next two years. Rafsanjani has invested
heavily in improving relations with the Soviet Union
and essentially has looked to Moscow for Iran's main
source of modern military equipment, for a partner in
resisting US influence in the Middle East, and for the
main route for increased gi ports to Eur
same time, press reporting eon ees

t suggests that Tehran's main efforts at
‘expanding relations with the republics has been aimed
at cultivating the nonreformist leaders there, who may
not long remain in power. Rafsanjani, for example,
was hosting Azerbaijan’s hardline President Mutali-
bov in Tehran when the abortive coup occurred in
August. Iran will have to craft a policy that preserves
its interests in gaining influence in the republics
without oe” its potential ties to the central

  

government.J2"

Tehran is likely to focus on four main goals in its
policy toward the Soviet Union. It will seek to:

+ Preserve the arms relationship. Tehran has made
the strategic decision to rebuild its military
strength, especially its air force and air defense,
with primarily Soviet equipment. It will seek to
ensure that the USSR—whether a shrunken central
government or a stronger Russian Republic govern-
ment—continues to provide equipment and spares to
Tran, although they will seek to avoid complete
dependence on the USSR.

Encourage stability in Central Asia and the Cauca-
sus. Even before the Soviet coup, the Iranians had
expressed a great deal of concern over the potential
for unrest in the Muslim repubiics, even to the point
of Rafsanjani quietly urging the center to keep

_ order there. Tehran will be especially concerned to
limit the chances that, as in Yugoslavia, ethnic
rivalries will lead to civil war, which at a minimum,
could threaten an already overburdened Iran (it
currently hosts more than | million Afghan and
Iraqi refugees) with a new wave of Azeri or Central
Asian refugees. Iran will also be concerned that

At ty

 

nationalist unrest in the Soviet southern republics
might inspire similar separatism among Iranian
ethnic minorities—particularly the roughly 14 mil-
lion Iranian Azeris—or stimulate popular demands
for democratization in Tehran. Because Tehran's
ties to the republics are primarily with the existing
elites and the pro-Rafsanjani Tehran Times has
stated that Iran opposes some of the “extremist
nationalistic movements” in the Soviet Union, Iran
probably will encourage the current republic gov-
ernments to remain in power, maintain domestic
order, and possibly to retain close ties to the center,
Tehran sees such ties as preferable to the alterna-
tives: increased Western, Saudi, or Turkish
influence.

+ Expand Iranian influence. Iran will seek to ensure

that friendly governments emerge in the six Muslim
republics of the former Soviet Union, but we judge
that ‘it will have little influence over the process.
Iran will probably concentrate on government-to-
government and trade ties initially, particularly in
Central Asia. Indeed, within a week of the Soviet
coup, the Tehran Times suggested that the leaders
of the Soviet Muslim republics should meet in
Tehran to discuss coordinating the republics’ re-
sponse to the breakup of the Union. Iranians will
increase their involvement in a wide variety of
religious activities. Tehran may try to expand ties to
radical! Islamic elements in the Muslim republics as
another avenue of influence, especially if Tehran
perceives any new republic leadership to be un-
friendly. The competition for the hearts and minds
of Soviet Muslims is likely to be brisk; we expect
Iran to be the least able to compete: modern
nationalists in the Soviet Muslim republics are
likely to be more attracted to Turkey’s secular,
democratic system, while mast traditional Mus-
lims—outside of those in Shia Azerbaijan—will
probably look more favorably on the more ortho-
dox—and wealthier—Saudis. There is little hard
information, but Iran’s informal or clandestine net-
works in the Soviet republics are probably not well
developed.
Page-21
Nukus

MENIYA

UZBEKISTAN

    

  
     

ot

iD

 

 

SUNNI MUSLIM

{J Turkic origin (Karakalpak, Kazakh,
Kyegyz, Turkmen, Uzbek)

Other Sunni of Turkic origin
lranian origin (Tajik)

BBS Other Sunni of Iranian origin
BBE Kurds (primarily Sunni

 

SHIA MUSLIM

Turkic origin (Azeri)

Other Shia of Turkic origin

(23) tranian origin Bakhtiar, ur, Persian)
Other Shia of Iranian origin

 

Semitic Arab peoples
HM Other non-Muslim peoples

Sparsely populated or uninhabited
areas are shown in white.

0 100 200 300 Kilometers
0 100 200 300 Miles

 

 

 

Ne ~ 7
a 7 ladian claim
wa a
Page-22
Figure 5
,\)) Major Muslim Ethnic Gr. ups in Iran and the Muslim Republics of the g,

: li .

i UKRAINE cw Tt

4 3

: « Sevastopol’ oporet’
, RUSSIA a
« Stavropol’

stone : S oO Vv

Batumi, GEORGIA
Page-23
+ Use its relationship with the USSR to counterbal-
ance US influence in the Middle East, However,
Tehran almost certainly will recognize that the
USSR will be an increasingly weak lever against the
United States. As a consequence, Iran will probably
begin an even more active search for additional
balancers against the United States:

Iran and the United States: Dealing With the
Last Superpower

We do not think Iran will take a Major initiative to
restore diplomatic relations with the United States,
although it may seek improved economic ties. The
question of relations with the United States is the
Gordian knot of Iranian politics, in which ideology,
geostrategic concerns, economics, a lengthy history of
US involvement in Iranian affairs, and more than 10
years of bitter enmity are all entwined. As a'result,
Progress in improving relations between Tran and the
United States is likely to be slow and incremental
while Tehran concentrates on issues of more immedi-
ate concern—such as the breakup of the Soviet Union
and the development of Persian Gulf security arrange-
ments—and focuses its opening to the West on the
European Community and Japan| 5

Iranian media continue to reflect Tehran’s wariness of
improving relations with Washington and do not
appear to be making any effort to Prepare the public
for a change in Iranian-US relations. If a change in
Iranian policy toward the United States is in the
offing, most likely not until after the 1992 Majles
election,t [ea of Po) .
So i We might see Tranian
newspapers begin to note improvements in US behav-
ior to suggest Washington is meeting Tehran’s pre-
conditions to normalization

Nonetheless, Rafsanjani probably wants a reasonable
working relationship with Washington. Washington’s
efforts to isolate Iran—including embargoes on tech-
nology, such as aircraft parts—intervening with other
governments to limit foreign assistance to Tran, and its
influence in bodies like the IMF and World Bank

19

 

et

 

have complicated Iran’s efforts at reconstruction,
Reversing such efforts is Rafsanjani’s main goal vis-a-
vis the United States, but it would require a renuncia-
tion of Iranian support for terrorism. Tehran, for its
part, will continue to press for the return of military
Property and funds, often referred to generically by
Iran as “frozen assets,” which are the subject of
claims at the Iran-US Claims Tribunal at The Hague,
as the price for improved relations with the United
States.

Despite Rafsanjani’s apparent support for better ties,
he has not built a consensus for it within the regime.
His hardline opposition is unalterably and vocally
opposed to any retreat from confrontation with the
United States, and, although it is a declining force in
Iranian politics, its criticism forces Rafsanjani to be
cautious. Rafsanjani will be careful not t6 undermine
Tran’s self-appointed role as the leader ef the Islamic
resistance to the West and will remain suspicious of
US intentions toward his clerical regime. Most mem-
bers of the mainstream clergy do not endorse develop-
ing relations with the United States, preferring in-
stead that Iran look to Western Europe and Japan for
financial and economic ties]

Because of these constraints, Rafsanjani is likely to
move slowly and prudently to repair relations. He
demonstrated this caution in two areas in which there
is high US interest:

+ The Gulf war. Although Iran clearly could not join
the coalition against Iraq in a military sense, it
could have done more—as Syria did—to seize the
Opportunity presented by the crisis to emphasize
areas of common interest with the United States,

 

 

pes hoes
ck AEs ([Tebran’ fedtised its oe
on courting the Gulf states‘and Europe, while
condemning US actions. On occasion, Iran was even
obstructive, criticizing Turkey for allowing the US
Air Force to stage combat missions out of Incirlik
and attempting to preempt the start of the ground
war with a last-minute peace initiative.
Page-24
The Iranian paper Jomhuri-ye Eslami,
which often reflects the views of the Majles hard-
liners, argued that holding hostages is an effective
way to block US efforts to establish a new order in
the Middle East and suggested prolonging the crisis
into the US presidential election. Rafsanjani almost
certainly wants to resolve the hostage issue, but his
negotiating tactics do not suggest that he thinks he
needs to end the problem quickly. Should, as is most
likely, all Western hostages be freed, Tehran’s
expectations would increase for a speedier resolution
of the “frozen assets” issue ¥ .

Rafsanjani will probably try to hew to his incremental
strategy toward the United States despite the implo-
sion of the Soviet empire. Nonetheless, the collapse of
Soviet power may force Tehran to reevaluate and
adjust the pace of its policy toward the United States.
Whatever the pace and scope of Iran’s opening to the
West, US and Iranian interests will continue to clash.
The most likely points of friction include:

+ Regional security. The Iranian regime regards the
reduction of US influence in the Middle East to be
in its national interest as well as ideologically
desirable. Tehran will try to minimize US participa-
tion in regional security and will view any bilateral
security accords between the United States and
GCC states as directed against Iran.

+ Regional disarmament. Tehran is deeply skeptical
of US disarmament proposals, believing that they
are skewed in favor of Israel and aimed at keeping
the Muslim countries in a position of inferiority.
Tehran is likely to oppose US efforts toward region-

. al disarmament, although it may be more coopera-
tive with the UN, which it feels is less likely to
support a pro-US and pro-Israel agenda.

The “new world order.” Iranian political rhetoric
and press commentary across the spectrum exhibit
considerable anxiety regarding the emergence of the

  

   

  

 

Unitéd States as the only triie-stipérpower, Tehran
regards with suspicion US efforts to shape the
global order, fearing they are simply window dress-
ing for a US bid for world hegemony. Iran’s efforts
to mobilize Third World and especially Muslim
resistance to US policy are largely quixotic, but they
suggest Tehran will be a diplomatic nuisance in
multilateral and regional forums.

* The Arab-Israeli peace process. Tehran remain:
igidly opposed to peace with Israel} 7

       
 

Se

 

 

 

7 7 JIran’s dispatch of envoys ‘fo the
Arab states to urge Muslim defense of Palestinian
rights, its growing support of radical PaléStinian
groups, a marked rise in Hizballah attacks on the
Israeli security zone in South Lebanon, and plans to
convene a Palestinian conference in October 1991

all suggest ‘at Izan’s opposition is more than
rhetorical. . - 5

The clerical regime in Tehran is also likely to oppose
Washington over issues in which US and Iranian
ideology, culture, and political style clash:

+ Terrorism. Iranian support for terrorism will re-

main a significant issue dividing Tehran and Wash-
ington} me ‘

  
  

   

 

» [fetiran is unlikely to conduct
terrorism directly against US or Western interests
during the next two years, but it i porting
radical groups that might do.s *

   
 
 
 

         

CSD « «Tehran is willing to
ponsor anti-Israeli attacks by Hizballah and radi-
cal Palestinian groups in hopes of disrupting the
peace process.

 

20
Page-25
Moreover, there will be a continuing danger that
external events could be perceived in Tehran as
unforgivable insults that must be avenged, much as
the publication of The Satanic Verse.
‘ attacks on bookstores and translator:

 

. Human rights, Tehran portrays us ‘efforts to hold
the regime accountable for human tights abuses in
Iran as a US attempt to blacken Iran’s name and
maintain its isolation. Under Rafsanjani, Tran has

i worked diligently to end UN efforts to monitor

human rights abuses in Iran and to reject Western

criticism as a misunderstanding of Islamic culture.

Tehran will continue to reject Western efforts to

. ease human rights abuses in Iran. Indeed, some

political rights may well be further circumscribed

under Rafsanjani as he moves to intimidate

opposition and maintain domestic ores 4

 

  

21

    

 

et
Page-26
Paces DA weer 26
Ave Grane Co)Cs) Cv) ls)