
Page-58
»
‘

 

/ASB?
“SECRET Ne es
COMFROHER=DISStITE 22 May 1963
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 11-63
(Supersedes NIE 11-9-62)

Main Trends in Soviet Foreign Policy

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleat
22 MAY 1963

CODMTROLED-BISSEM Ne 367
Page-59
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF
Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:

The Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside
of his jurisdiction.

AARRING

 
   
    

tates
the trans-

within the guesaimerctent Stawertilels.i
:

Sn or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is
Page-60
This documer.: has been
approved for release through
the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of

the Central Intelligence Agency.
sift

vate 24/44

me 105

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-63

Main Trends in Soviet Foreign Policy
Page-61
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM. ......... eee eee ee 1
PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS Jetset ye re |
DISCUSSION ............ Be ee ee 3
I. THE BACKGROUND OF PRESENT SOVIET POLICY. ... 3

Setbacks to the Soviet cause—the present mood in Moscow—
reasons for the Cuban missile venture

Il. THE SITUATION IN THE LEADERSHIP... . . 5
Characteristics of Khrushchev’s policy—nature of his op-
position—emergence of a conservative consensus

Ill. THE SOVIET VIEW OF PRESENT OPPORTUNITIES... . 7
Limits of detente policy—dangers of forward moves—at-
tempts to improve military position—likelihood of con-
tinued probes—chances of another high-risk move

IV. SOVIET TACTICS INTHE NEAR TERM... .. 9
Negotiations on Berlin and disarmament—compromises
with Castro—military intentions in Cuba—attitude to
revolutions in new nations—attempts to limit Sino-Soviet
dispute

V. THE LONGER RUN. ............... . 14
Influence of unforeseen events—level of disaffection inside
the USSR—erosive effects of Communist divergences—con-
sequences of foreign success or failure

VI. THE QUESTION OF SUCCESSION . . . 17
Importance of the individual leader—likelihood of | a succes-
sion struggle—role of party, state, police, and military—

t probable policy disputes—foreign policy in the succession

struggle

 

' ”
he ii
Page-62
sof

MAIN TRENDS IN
SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY

THE PROBLEM

To estimate main trends in Soviet foreign policy, with atten-
tion to the influence of political developments within the USSR
and the world Communist movement.

PRINCIPAL CONCLUSIONS

A. The forced withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba last
fall was the most dramatic in a series of disappointments and
setbacks which have been plaguing Soviet policy. It is true that
these have been offset somewhat by space successes, by advances
in the development of missiles and nuclear weapons, and by the
retention of a foothold in the Western Hemisphere. Neverthe-
less, the fundamentally optimistic outlook of the Soviet leaders
seems overlaid at present with a sober appreciation of obstacles
and dangers and a realization that earlier expectations of rapid
advances must be stretched out into the future. The current
mood of the Soviet leadership must also be adversely affected by
the continuing Chinese challenge to Soviet authority in the Bloc
and the Communist movement. (Paras. 1-7, 30-32)

B. Largely as a result of these frustrations to Soviet hopes,
Khrushchev’s leadership appears to have come into question in
recent months. Although his colleagues probably have not been
seeking his downfall, they have apparently been trying to com-

NOTE: A detailed examination of Soviet military and economic policy
appears in two recent estimates: NIE 11-463, “Soviet Military Capa-
bilities and Policies, 1962-1967,” dated 20 March 1963, TOP SECRET,
and NIE 11-5-63, “Soviet Economic Problems,” dated 20 March 1963,
SECRET.
Page-63
sof

pel him to take greater account of their collective opinions; Khru-
shchev has responded with policy revisions which seem to reflect
their advice. While Khrushchev’s freedom of action may thus
be somewhat restricted at present, we believe that his essential
authority remains intact. (Paras. 8-12)

C. In the present phase, we think that the Soviets are unlikely
either to make serious attempts to resolve cold-war tensions or
to undertake a vigorous new offensive against non-Communist
positions. Instead, they seem to see the present period as one
which can best be used to build up their strength and to fortify
existing positions in preparation for future opportunities. They
apparently do not plan any early moves either toward agreement
or toward a heightened crisis over Berlin. We believe that their
approach to disarmament will be primarily agitational. In Cuba,
their primary present aims are to induce the US to move toward
de facto acceptance of Castro and to consolidate the Soviet foot-
hold, from which they mean to pursue the longer term struggle
for Latin America. (Paras. 13-29)

D. We do not mean to imply, however, that Soviet foreign
policy in the present phase will be passive. The USSR will be
alert to search out vulnerabilities in the non-Communist world
which it believes it can usefully exploit. It will also continue
efforts to make its influence felt throughout the underdeveloped
areas. Furthermore, while we think that the Soviets will take
a sober view in the present period of the opportunities for a major
advance, there is one important caveat to this judgment. We
have identified the need for a major triumph which would
reverse a trend of adversity as an important part of the motiva-
tion for deploying missiles to Cuba. This need still remains;
therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility of some new and
audacious move. (Paras. 17-18)

E. A key uncertainty surrounding future Soviet policy arises
from the problem of the succession to Khrushchev. The initial
tendency after his departure would probably be for more con-
servative elements to gain predominance, but the longer a suc-
cession struggle remains unresolved, the more tendency there
would be for a wider range of alternative policies to be given
active consideration. (Paras. 42-47)

2 wif
Page-64
ch

F. We see some prospect that, over the long run, the element
of ideological hostility in the Soviet outlook might gradually
diminish. This depends upon many uncertain factors, however,
and even if it should come about, the requirements of Soviet
national security, prestige, and ambition would still bring the
USSR into frequent collision with the interests of other states.
(Paras. 34-41)

DISCUSSION

|. THE BACKGROUND OF PRESENT SOVIET POLICY

1. The position in which the Soviet leaders find themselves in 1963
is not the one which they anticipated five years ago. Soviet thinking
in 1958 was pervaded by a general optimism arising from a number
of factors and calculations. Khrushchev, who had recently obtained
a commanding position, apparently judged that he had overcome both
economic dislocations and the political turbulence unloosed by de-Stalin-
ization and could look forward to steady and substantial internal prog-
ress. His view of relations among Communist States seems to have
been that, freed of the burden of Stalinist excesses, Soviet policy could
guide the Bloc more effectively with a looser hand while preserving the
essentials of Moscow’s leadership.

2. Looking out upon the non-Communist world, Khrushchev probably
had considerable hopes that trends in the underdeveloped areas would
continue to run in his favor and that the USSR’s earlier successes in the
Middle East could be extended in that area and repeated in Asia, Africa,
and Latin America. Most important of all, the USSR’s early sputnik
and ICBM successes evidently persuaded him that the image and per-
haps even the substance of Soviet physical power would soon overbear
that of the US and bring the West to the conference table ready for
concessions to his demands. In short, Khrushchev in 1958 saw the
“world relation of forces” shifting rapidly in favor of the USSR and
believed that history, with vigorous assistance from Moscow, would
in the coming period reward the Soviet cause with regular, tangible
advances.

3. Almost none of this has come to pass. In the relations of mili-
tary power, regarded by the Soviets as an indispensable element in their
general calculation of forces, US military and intelligence programs
have led to a situation in which both sides, and indeed much of world
opinion, understand that strategic advantage does not lie with the
USSR. The Berlin ultimatum of 1958 remains unfulfilled and, save
for the constriction of East Germany’s refugee flow, basic Soviet aims
in the key area of Germany are no further advanced. Although the So-

wher 3
Page-65
sho

viets may expect some benefits from present strains in NATO, over the
last five years the strength of the West as a whole has almost certainly
assumed a more formidable aspect in their eyes. In the underdeveloped
countries, postcolonial nationalism has in most areas openly diverged
from the hoped-for association with Soviet policies, and the USSR has
not succeeded in establishing patronage, much less control, over the
new nations.

4. Over the same period, the USSR’s relations with its major ally have
fallen into acute disarray, and the Soviets must now defend themselves
throughout the Communist movement to preserve a leadership which
had not been effectively challenged for four decades. At home, economic
progress has faltered for a variety of reasons, of which the most im-
portant is the impact of military and space spending. At the same
time, intellectual circles have used Khrushchev’s attacks upon Stalin
to raise painful questions which tend to challenge the authority of the
party and its present leaders.

5. This is by no means to say that the last five years have brought an
uninterrupted series of defeats for Soviet policy. During this period,
for example, a procession of space feats has regularly revitalized Soviet
prestige and sustained the USSR’s lead in this important field of com-
petition. Both nuclear and missile development have recorded notable
technical progress. The Berlin Wall has greatly eased the problems of
the client state of East Germany. Cuba's accession to the Communist
camp remains a major gain despite the October backdown and the sub-
sequent problems and dangers encountered in dealing with Castro and
the US. Nevertheless, the Soviet leadership seems to recognize the last
five years as a period in which problems accumulated.

6. There is no sign that this trend has caused the Soviets to revise
their fundamental assumptions or that they regard these setbacks as
more than temporary. There are many signs, however, of a recognition
that earlier expectations were overoptimistic. Their unwillingness to
turn over Berlin access to East Germany and their precipitate with-
drawal of strategic missiles from Cuba are the most striking instances
testifying to a sober appraisal of their opportunities under the present
relation of forces between East and West. A similar concern can be
observed in their treatment of the Sino-Soviet dispute, the importance
of which they no longer attempt to deny, and of their military position,
where assertions of absolute superiority have given way to claims of
parity and expressions of anxiety about US intentions and the future
relation of military forces. Similarly, the indiscriminate optimism of
Soviet pronouncements concerning new countries and independence
movements is now heavily tempered by criticism of the bourgeois and
anti-Communist tendencies of nationalist leaders. Domestically, the re-
gime has had to issue warnings to consumers that defense priorities will

4 SEGFET
Page-66
A

cut into the program to raise living standards, and Khrushchev does
not seem confident that former rates of general economic growth can
be quickly regained. In sum, the leadership appears to realize that the
disappointments of recent years are not isolated but in fact represent
a series of related setbacks stemming in part from mistaken appraisals
of the possibilities open to Soviet Policy.

7. In our view, the attempt to deploy strategic missiles in Cuba was
in considerable part due to Soviet recognition of this trend. We think
that the Soviet leaders, as they pondered this venture, were highly
conscious of the failing momentum of their offensive and therefore
put a very high premium on a dramatic triumph which they could
turn to account in many ways—to alter both the image and the sub-
stance of relative power, to prepare a fruitful ground for Berlin negotia-
tions, to undermine US influence in Latin America, to disarm Chinese
criticisms. They may have judged the chances of failure as high but
nevertheless felt it necessary to take a calculated risk, or the need for
a victory may have led them to persuade themselves that the chances
of failure were in fact low. In any case, we believe that the accumu-
lated discouragements of recent years contributed to a decision which
did not reflect the caution usually characteristic of Soviet foreign policy
moves.

I. THE SITUATION IN THE LEADERSHIP

8. The failure of the Cuban missile venture has aggravated all the
Problems which the Soviets meant it to resolve. There are various
signs that it has also affected Soviet top-level politics. Analysis of the
workings of the Soviet leadership must always involve considerable
speculation, but our tentative conclusions Suggest that, at the present
time, Soviet foreign policy may be influenced in more than usual degree
by internal disagreements.

9. Khrushchev occupies the central Position in Soviet politics, and
his personality and conceptions give a strong stamp to both the in-
ternal and foreign policies of the USSR, He is capable of revising
ideology to suit his purposes, but he is a great deal more than merely
pragmatic. Compared to his predecessor and apparently also to some
of his present colleagues, he is an imaginative innovator in both doctrine
and policy, prone to change course rapidly in his incessant search for
results. Approaching each new tactic with his characteristic energy,
he tends to outdo others in boldness and often to assume considerable
risk, trusting to his political skill to retrieve a situation somehow if
difficulties ensue, even by reversing himself completely if necessary.
The prime move of this type which can be directly associated with
Khrushchev is the daring stroke of de-Stalinization, but the same traits
can be observed in such disparate moves as the New Lands campaign,
the Berlin challenge of 1958, the 1960 military reorganization plan, the

S@RRET 5
Page-67
whe

cultivation of a “spirit of Camp David,” and the two reconcilations
with Tito. This pattern suggests to us that Khrushchev either initiated
the Cuban missile venture himself or adopted it early and supported
it against any doubters.

10. Because of these tendencies, any opposition to Khrushchev within
the Soviet leadership has tended to be a conservative opposition, that
is, one which both prefers greater caution in the appraisal of risks and
shies away from novel departures in doctrine or policy. Khrushchev
is accessible to the ideas of others, but it appears that most of his in-
novations originate either with himself, younger associates, or special-
ists rather than with his colleagues in the top leadership. White he is
usually able to muster majorities for his proposals, some of them have
at various times encountered opposition which has limited or even
undone them. And when several of his programs encounter difficulties
simultaneously, the restraints exerted by his colleagues accumulate.
If the coalescence of opinion is strong, Khrushchev reacts by shifting
ground to place himself at the head of the new and more conservative
consensus which is forming. But he often returns to his original con-
ceptions when he deems that a propitious moment has arrived.

11. The recent period appears to be one in-which Khrushchev has
been on the defensive and has had to move away from venturesome
positions with which he had clearly identified himself in the past.
In February, he all but abandoned his longstanding proposals for a
substantial increase in allocations to agriculture and light industry;
these had been continually opposed by the military and probably by
some political leaders as well. In March, Khrushchev’s chastisement of
rebellious writers and artists abruptly checked the de-Stalinization cam-
paign which he had himself revived last fall. Khrushchev in the past
has used de-Stalinization as a means of direct attack upon political
opponents, and it is possible that this latest reversal represents a suc-
cessful defense by his intended targets. At a minimum, Khrushchev’s
judgment has probably been discredited by the strong antiregime over-
tones which emerged when the intellectuals responded to his earlier

encouragement to renewed attacks on Stalin.

12. These moves are logical responses to real problems, but they
also comport better with the predilections of some of Khrushchev’s
colleagues than with his own earlier views and this, along with several
ambiguous indications of current uncertainty in Moscow, suggests that
his predominance has diminished somewhat. The difficulties with
China, the frustrations over Berlin, and the humiliation in Cuba have
probably worked in the same direction. We think it unlikely that any
faction is actively seeking Khrushchev’s downfall. Instead, such lead-
ers as Kozlov and Suslov have probably wished to bring about a greater
practice of collectivity in Soviet policymaking and, by this route, to
tighten central controls, insist upon ideological conformity, and eschew

6 SEGRET
Page-68
he

radical and risky departures in domestic and foreign affairs. Khru-
shchev’s temperament is not amenable to collectivity, however, and
he is likely to respond to checks of this kind by moving to reassert his
dominance. Kozlov’s illness is in this respect convenient; whether real
or political, it undermines his present strength and may lead to fur-
ther personnel shifts which Khrushchev could turn to his own ad-
vantage.

lll. THE SOVIET VIEW OF PRESENT OPPORTUNITIES

13. We believe that a phase in regime politics of the sort described
above has contributed to the relative immobility which seems to charac-
terize current Soviet foreign policy. Even without this factor, however,
there are important reasons for the Soviets to avoid major new moves.
From the leadership’s viewpoint, no major change in Soviet policy, such
as a serious attempt to reduce cold-war tensions drastically or a vigorous
new offensive against non-Communist positions, seems to offer much
promise at present.

14. The Soviets would not expect that they could improve their po-
sition through negotiated agreements at a time when they are relatively
weak and their enemy feels relatively strong. In such periods, the task
of Soviet diplomacy is primarily to pursue defensive tactics until a
more favorable correlation of forces can be brought about. Khru-
shchev’s post-October advocacy of negotiation and compromise was in-
tended primarily to buttress his version of the missile withdrawal as
a victory for peace rather than a defeat for the Soviet Union and to
forestall possible US efforts to follow up with pressures on other Soviet
positions. The Soviets did offer one concession which seemed impor-
tant, probably also to them, when Khrushchev accepted the principle
of on-site inspection of a test ban. But the USSR soon indicated, by
its conduct of the negotiations which followed and its refusal to go
beyond three inspections, that it required greater counterconcessions
than were forthcoming from the US before it would actually sign a
treaty. The requirement to sustain some commitment to Cuba in the
face of continued US hostility to Castro raised a further barrier against
any general relaxation of tensions, as did the need for an external threat
to justify continuing deprivations at home.

15. In fact, while statements praising the method of mutual con-
cessions have not dropped out of Soviet propaganda altogether, they
are now overshadowed by charges that the West remains hostile and
has no genuine interest in reaching settlements. This does not mean,
however, that aggressive Soviet actions are to follow. In the first place,
the USSR recognizes that the world situation currently presents no
opportunities for major advances at tolerable levels of risk: indeed,
in 1963 it has suffered distinct reverses in the Middle East and is having
difficulty in holding its own in some areas of Africa. In the second

cof 7
Page-69
dhe

place, the Cuban episode has demonstrated to the Soviets that forward
action is not without peril. Current Soviet pronouncements betray a
keen appreciation of US power, and the October crisis has almost cer-
tainly persuaded them that they had underrated US determination
to use that power.

16. In these circumstances, the Soviets seem to see the present pe-
riod as one which can best be used to build up their strength and to
fortify existing positions in preparation for future opportunities to make
new advances. They seek in the first instance to strengthen their
military power in hopes of gaining a position which repairs their pres-
tige and lays greater inhibitions on Western policy.! Recent strong
reaffirmations of military priorities reflect a determination to proceed
with existing programs and, beyond this, a possible decision to increase
military spending above previously planned levels. These programs
already include the introduction of protected strategic missile systems,
the development of very-high-yield warheads, and a major antiballistic
missile effort which has already led to the deployment of a first-genera-
tion system at one location. The USSR is also pursuing a vigorous
research and development effort aimed at technological advances which
could radically enhance both the war-fighting capability and the po-
litical value of its military establishment. As an important aspect of
these efforts, the Soviets are conducting a space program aimed at
prestigious accomplishments and are almost certainly investigating the
feasibility of military space systems.

17. We do not mean, however, that the Soviets consider that, unless
they can achieve some sort of military advantage over the West, their
political advances have reached final limits. Military power remains
only one ingredient, albeit a very important one, in the Soviet concept
of the forces which determine their prospects. Still less do we believe
that Soviet foreign policy in the present phase will be passive. The
USSR will be alert to search out vulnerabilities in the non-Communist
world, to exploit the differences which have arisen in the NATO alli-
ance, and to make its influence felt throughout Asia, Latin America,
and Africa. But the Soviet leaders’ outlook is not one of high confi-
dence that events can readily be made to move in their favor, and we
think it likely that they will take a sober view in the present period
of the opportunities for major advance.

18. There is one important caveat to this judgment. We have iden-
tified the need for a major triumph which would reverse a trend of

‘The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not consider the reasons
listed sufficiently describe the basis for Soviet military policy decisions. He would
insert the following sentence at this point:

This would be in furtherance of a basic Soviet military policy objective of
building by such means as become available toward achievement of a military
superiority over the West.
Page-70
adversity as an important part of the Soviet motivation for deploying
missiles to Cuba. This need still remains; in fact, it has been magnified

Some new and audacious move. Such actions are essentially incalcu-
lable, although we think they are somewhat more likely when Khru-
shchev’s ascendancy is high than when collectivity, that is, his need
to defer to the opinions of others, has been strengthened. Nor can
We predict where such a move might be launched. We note, however,
that Berlin would offer a field for a far-reaching Soviet victory, although
it is obviously an extremely risky area in which to pose a major chal-
lenge.

19. It is also conceivable that Khrushchev will react to Present frus-
trations in the opposite way, that is, by focusing upon a major agree-
ment with the West, rather than a major encroachment against it,

in earlier Soviet demands. If he nevertheless chose to pursue this
course, and to represent the results as important advances for the USSR,
he would thereby set up a powerful momentum for general detente and
bring new confusion into official ideology. This in turn would intensify
the strains in the international Communist movement and magnify
Present doubts within the Soviet Party about his leadership. For these
reasons, and because of Khrushchev’s own ambitions to achieve the kind

IV. SOVIET TACTICS IN THE NEAR TERM

20. Berlin and Germany. We believe that the USSR does not intend
in the near future to Pose a sharp and direct challenge to the Western

position in Berlin. Khrushchev’s remarks in East Berlin last January

ejecting the Allies. Similarly, the manner in which the USSR has
resumed Berlin conversations with the US Suggests that it does not
intend an early showdown. We think it unlikely, however, that the
Soviets expect these talks to lead to any early agreement on Berlin.
Instead, we believe that their motives are, first, to avoid the impression

SRBRET 9
Page-71
SBgET

of weakness which would be conveyed by allowing the issue to die entirely
and, second, to get into a position to sow distrust and suspicion among
the Allies and West Germany. In pursuing these ends, they are likely
to resort to sporadic local harassments.

21. It is possible, however, that the Soviets will in fact seek some
sort of mutually acceptable Berlin agreement as a way of discharging
Khrushchev’s longstanding commitment on this matter and collecting
such concessions as can be extracted in return for an easing of pressures
on the Allied position in the city. In such an effort, they would pre-
sumably have to accept a continued Allied presence in West Berlin
and some form of guaranteed access. The USSR for its part would be
primarily interested in extracting as much recognition as possible for
the GDR, perhaps by involving it in the administration of Allied ground
and air access in a way which did not entirely extinguish formal Soviet
responsibility. Once such an agreement was achieved, the Soviets would
probably feel free to fulfill their long-adjourned promise to conclude a
peace treaty with the GDR. The USSR would of course wish to set
a predetermined duration on a Berlin agreement and, if this proved
impossible, to obtain a formula sufficiently vague on this point to allow
them to renew pressures at some future time.

22. Recent developments in the Western Alliance affecting the con-
trol of nuclear weapons and the present check to the European unity
movement seem to have focused Soviet attention once again on Europe.
The prospects for changes of political leadership in West Germany and
Britain probably reinforce this tendency. We do not foresee any par-
ticular Soviet initiative aimed at European problems, but the possibility
of promoting disarray in the Western camp may be more strongly pres-
ent as a factor affecting Soviet policy than it has been for some time
past. Both the Franco-German treaty and the plans to admit West
Germany to a larger role in NATO’s nuclear policy have already pro-
voked a sharp verbal Soviet response. The vague threat to take counter-
measures against West German participation in a multilateral force
probably has no more substance than the long series of threats which
have accompained the whole process of German rearmament. It is pos-
sible, however, that the Soviets will respond by increasing their efforts
to extract from the West some formal recognition of the existence of
two Germanies, reasoning that this would offset the dangers of a nuclear-
armed Federal Republic by making it more difficult for Bonn to mount
heavy pressures against East Germany. There may also be a revival
of Soviet interest in limited arms control measures affecting Germany.

23. Disarmament. The Soviets probably still see certain advantages
to themselves in more general measures of arms control and disarma-
ment. They would doubtless count it an advance, for example, if they
could find a means of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons
or reducing the chances of accidental war. The burden of modern arma-

10 beget
Page-72
uf

ments on the Soviet economy is an increasingly important argument for
the stabilization of the arms race. On the other hand, the Soviets set
great store by the political usefulness of great military power. Further-
more, they are aware that broad disarmament or arms control measures
would have profound implications—intimate cooperation with the
enemy and recognition of a higher sovereignty in an international con-
trol organ—running contrary to their assertions of inevitable hostility
between the two world camps. As a result, they have regarded disarma-
ment questions primarily as an opportunity to capture peace senti-
ments and to mobilize pressures against Western military measures,

24. Present Soviet: behavior indicates that post-October reappraisals
have not altered this approach, and that the USSR does not regard the
present period as a favorable one for reaching arms control agreements
which would advance Soviet interests. Such a conclusion seems to be
reflected in the announcement of economic policies which recommit the
Soviets to an intense military competition. Moreover, in the present
context, it would be difficult to move on to further significant advances
in the field of disarmament and arms control without first concluding
a test ban agreement. The Soviets have evidently decided that the gap
between Soviet and US positions on this matter, while narrowed, is still
too wide to be bridged. In this, we believe that they are influenced by
the desire not to encourage hopes for a detente which would be generated
inside the USSR by a major East-West agreement. During the present
phase, therefore, we believe that the Soviets approach to disarmament
will be primarily agitational and will focus on those measures which
offer one-sided rather than mutual advantages.

25. Cuba? The outlines of a post-October Soviet policy toward Cuba
have now emerged. The USSR’s immediate objective is to preserve the
Position it won in 1960-1962, in the face of pressures from the US and
problems in dealing with Castro. To this end it is continuing a sub-
stantial flow of economic assistance which appears sufficient to main-
tain the Cuban economy at least at present levels. It regularly reiter-
ates a commitment, albeit undefined, to the security of the regime.
While the Soviets of course would prefer a disciplined puppet to take
charge in Havana, they have accepted Castro, put up with his periodic
public barbs at the USSR, and apparently agreed that the Moscow-
oriented Communists should avoid conflict with him. Similarly, they
are trying to reduce the chances of heightened US pressures by not firing
upon overflights, by withdrawing some personnel, and probably also
by urging Castro to soft-pedal the fomentation of armed revolution in
Latin America. One purpose of these actions is to induce the US to
move toward de facto acceptance of Castro.

*A fuller discussion will be given in the forthcoming NIE 85-63, “Situation

and Prospects in Cuba,” (Qijjgiilietamme,

sfx n
Page-73
26. The pattern of Soviet policy toward Cuba described above prob-
ably means that the primary Soviet aim at present is to consolidate com-
munism in Cuba with a view to using it as a foothold from which to
pursue the longer term struggle for Latin America which the Soviets
foresee. If this is so, it is unlikely that the Soviets would prejudice this
aim by again attempting to use Cuba as a strategic base, thus courting
violent US action against the Castro regime. This is not to say that the
Soviets will never again attempt the introduction of some sort of offen-
sive weapons system into Cuba. The time might come when they would
again calculate that the net of advantages and risks would favor such
an,attempt. For at least the near term, however, the Soviets almost
certainly estimate that the risks of such an attempt would be excessive.

27. If this is their present judgment, the Soviet must reconsider the
usefulness to them of those forces which went to Cuba as part of the
missile deployment. There are some signs that they intend to make
gradual further withdrawals, but we would expect a significant number
of Soviet military personnel to remain in Cuba indefinitely, in training
and advisory roles at least. We expect the Soviets to hand over to
Castro their advanced Weapons as the Cuban forces are trained to
operate them, possibly including control over the surface-to-air missile
(SAM) system. We are unable to estimate a date by which Cubans
would acquire complete control of the SAM system, but we do not ex-
clude that this could occur as early as the latter part of 1963. This
would, in the Soviet view, involve some tisk of Cuban attacks upon
reconnaissance aircraft which could touch off a new major crisis, but
they may regard this risk as preferable to the political cost of either
withdrawing the system or trying to keep it indefinitely under their own
command.

28. The Underdeveloped Areas. The USSR’s understanding of the
“national liberation” movement identifies the emergence of new, inde-
Pendent nations as an important gain for the Soviet world Position.
The Soviets go on, however, to argue the necessity of a second stage,
that of “national democracy,” the hallmark of which is the Participation
of local Communists in a governing national front. This in turn creates
the prerequisites for “completing” the revolution, with or without vio-
lence, by installing the Communist Party in power. Events of the last
five years, however, have not followed this pattern. Cuba has reached
approximately the predicted destination, but by an unpredicted route
and in a manner which leaves the USSR with economic and military
leverage but without full disciplinary control. The Indonesian Com-
munist Party has successfully practiced the tactics of building political

*For a detailed discussion of Soviet Policy in the Middle East, see the recent
NIE 11-6-63, “The Soviet Role in the Arab World,” dated 24 April 1963, SECRET.
The USSR’s approach to Africa is examined in NIE 11-12-62, “Trends in Soviet
Policy Toward Sub-Saharan Africa,” dated 5 December 1962,

12 SEQRET
Page-74
er

weight and respectability and shows some promise of leading its coun-
try into the phase of “national democracy.” But the Cuban experience,
and the Indonesian Party’s behavior in the Sino-Soviet dispute, cannot
give the Soviets much assurance that the Indonesian Party in power
would follow Soviet guidance in a disciplined way either. Elsewhere,
nationalist leaders have generally rebuffed or even repressed the Com-
munists; in some cases, Soviet state relations with the new governments
have not escaped damage.

29. One of the features of the general line of policy described in this
paper will probably be an increased emphasis, in areas where this is
feasible, on efforts to build subversive capabilities and tangible political
assets within the underdeveloped countries. The challenge of the
Chinese Communists, and in Latin America the competing appeal of
Fidelismo, reinforce the reasons for a greater Soviet effort in this direc-
tion. Nevertheless, we do not expect any radical turn in Soviet policy
stressing early Communist attempts to come to power. The Soviet
leaders continue to give evidence that, in most cases, they regard such
attempts as premature, more likely to set back rather than advance the
fortunes of the local parties, and prejudicial to other Soviet interests.
Meanwhile, they will continue to rely upon diplomacy and material as-
sistance; even though stringencies in the domestic economy and their
growing awareness of the limited political returns on aid programs may
lead them to become more selective in assuming new economic commit-
ments, they do not wish to abandon this field to the West.4

30. Communist China, At the present stage of the Sino-Soviet dis-
pute, neither Moscow nor Peiping entertains much hope of pressuring
or persuading the rival leadership to alter its stand. The stakes in the
conflict are therefore the allegiance of other Communist parties and
radical movements in the non-Communist world. Because China has
made gradual but regular gains in this competition over the last two
years, particularly in Asia, the Soviets have a strong interest in gaining
some sort of respite, especially at a time when the accumulation of prob-
lems elsewhere has lowered their prestige. The clearest example of this
interaction occurred last October when the Soviets, foreseeing the pos-
sibility of a retreat in the Cuban missile crisis, made a vain bid to fore-
stall Chinese criticism by momentarily supporting Peiping in its border
dispute with India. The same tendency is evident in Khrushchev’s call
for a truce in polemical warfare and efforts to arrange bilateral talks.

31. But while the Soviets can shelve an issue like Berlin simply by
ceasing to agitate it, they have no means of unilaterally shutting off the
Sino-Soviet dispute. The Chinese show no disposition to stop pressing
their case, and Khrushchev is unwilling to make concessions important

‘For an examination of Soviet aid to these countries, see NIE 10-63, “Bloc
Economic and Military Assistance Programs,” dated 10 January 1963,

steer 13
Page-75
he

enough to allow the two to compose their differences for a time. The
present attempts to convoke a meeting have been carried on in a re-
markable public correspondence filled with uncompromising restate-
ments of position and veiled threats and insults. We think that a con-
ference, if it comes about, will at most result in a superficial compromise
which would be highly vulnerable to the next turn of international
events. Beyond these maneuvers, the general outlook is for a con-
tinuing and widening estrangement between the two powers in which
both Soviet and Chinese nationalism will become increasingly prominent.

32. In southeast Asia, differences with China, which include differ-
ences over the tactics of “national liberation” struggle, have worked to
complicate Soviet policy. Because of the important position of the
North Vietnamese as the prime movers of Communist policy in both
Laos and South Vietnam, the Soviets are probably increasingly reluctant
to oppose North Vietnamese interests. The Soviets probably do not want
to dissipate what influence they have in Hanoi by constant intervention
over secondary questions of local tactics, particularly if in doing so they
appear to be giving way to Western pressures. On the other hand, the
Soviets have broader interests and problems which transcend those con-
cerning Laos. Hence they would be loath to give the North Vietnamese
or Chinese a free hand to decide Communist policy. On balance, even
though the Soviets still probably prefer to maintain the Geneva settle-
ment, we think that they will be unable to respond to US and British
efforts to stabilize the Laotian situation unless US pressures induce the
local Communists to seek Soviet support.

V. THE LONGER RUN

33. It is wholly uncertain how long Soviet policy will focus on the
tasks of consolidation designed to prepare for a renewed offensive against
the non-Communist world. This depends on a number of factors, such
as the situation in the top leadership, the success of the USSR’s efforts
to improve its relative military position, and the opportunities for for-
ward action opened up by developments abroad. An aggravation of
divisions in Europe and between Europe and the US, for example, would
encourage the Soviets to pursue more actively the exacerbation of dif-
ferences in the Western camp. General policy, moreover, might be
heavily influenced by the need to respond to some unexpected turn of
events, such as a successful Communist revolution in Latin America, the
flaring up of a new Cuban crisis, or an escalation of armed conflict in
southeast Asia.

34. In our last estimate of the future course of Soviet foreign policy, *
we examined the possibility of a gradual evolution in the Soviet world
outlook which would diminish the importance of those conceptions of

“NIE 11-9-62, “Trends in Soviet Foreign Policy," dated 2 May 1962, poe

14 SEQRET
Page-76
fo

hostility derived from Communist ideology. At that time, we judged it
possible that, over a quite unpredictable period of time, certain factors
might force the Soviet leaders to adopt a more “normal” approach to
world politics, one giving greater weight to national interests and con-
ventional modes of international behavior as these are understood in the
West, and less to the effort to expand indefinitely the area of Moscow’s
control. In this section, we reconsider the nature and influence of these
factors: the course of developments inside the USSR, changing relations
within the Bloc and the Communist movement, and the movement of
events in the East-West competition.

35. Internal Developments. A year ago, we concluded that there was
some prospect of an evolutionary trend inside the USSR which, by allow-
ing public opinion to acquire a larger influence, would have some mod-
erating effect on the Soviet world outlook. We have seen no significant
movement over the last year, however, in the direction of involving wider
circles of opinion, presumably closer to the aspirations of the general
population, in Soviet policymaking. The regime has laid new economic
burdens on the consumer and, in Cuba, carried the country into a risky
and remote adventure irrelevant to the concerns and desires of the peo-
ple. These actions have probably cost the regime some of the popular
confidence and loyalty which it seeks, and the relatively bleak outlook
for the consumer in 1963 raises the possibility that demonstrations of
discontent may recur on the considerable scale of 1962. But these reac-
tions do not endanger the bases of regime control, and the recent reaf-
firmation of military priorities in the allocation of economic resources
confirms that they remain only one factor, and evidently not a decisive
one, in the leadership's choice of policies.

36. We attach considerable long-run importance, however, to the
climate of opinion which, making use of the opportunities of de-Stalini-
zation, has manifested itself among Soviet writers and artists, The
recent works of the cultural intelligentsia, and their responses to critical
attack, implicitly and sometimes even explicitly reject the legitimacy of
party authority in the arts. More than this, in their strong affirmation
of human values and their condemnation of the Stalinist past, they have
formulated the hitherto unspoken question of the Present leadership’s
responsibility for the crimes of the 1930’s and 1940’s and, consequently,
its fitness to rule today. Implicit in their revolt is also a repudiation
of the way in which the party defines its historic mission and its allega-
tion that the Western world is inevitably hostile to the USSR.

37. The regime has shown a special sensitivity to the intellectuals’
contention that the older generation does not deserve the respect of its
sons. It senses in this not only a criticism of individuals, but a repudia-
tion of the political achievements of the revolution to date. Current
measures of repression reflect party fears that these attitudes are spread-
ing to other groups, and there are signs that some students and scien-

SEQRET 15
Page-77
cof:

tific-technical workers share the artists’ outlook. In the face of the
present crackdown and demands for recantation, many of the rebellious
artists may not be able to sustain the collective insubordination which
their current silence represents. We believe, however, that their aliena-
tion from the party leadership as presently constituted is profound, and
that it will continue to find expression so long as the regime remains
unwilling, as it appears to be at present, to resort to repressions which
truly terrorize.

38. Relations in the Communist World. In the past year, events have
forced the Soviet leadership to move considerably further away from the
traditional Communist view of Moscow as the undisputed center and
order-giver for the entire world movement. Even as they look beyond
Mao Tse-tung to his successors, they have little hope of being able to
restore unity of action with Communist China or to be relieved of the
necessity to combat its independent influence in parties and movements
which earlier were exclusive Soviet preserves. By force of various cir-
cumstances, they have had to extend a special status to Cuba in the
socialist camp and to watch Albania, North Korea, North Vietnam, and
the parties in non-Communist Asia move varying distances out of their
sphere of influence. In pursuing a rapprochement with Tito, they have
had to compromise their old demands of hegemony.

39. In all these ways the Soviets, responding to a pluralistic and
contradictory world, are practicing a political give-and-take which has
less and less relation to traditional techniques of Stalinist manipulation
and to the blacks and whites of Stalinist thought. We believe that this
process within the Communist movement has an eroding effect upon the
basic Soviet view of world politics as essentially a bipolar struggle of
camp against camp. The private discourse of Soviet citizens and officials
frequently reflects a recognition that, in some matters, Soviet interests
parallel those of the West rather than those of Communist China. It
would be wrong, we think, to interpret this trend as leading in the direc-
tion of a common Soviet-Western front against China. But it is not
unreasonable to expect that the loosening of relationships inside the
Communist world will be a significant factor tending to diminish the
ideological ingredient in the Soviet outlook upon the non-Communist
world.

40. The Course of East-West Competition. In our last estimate, we
singled out the success or failure which the USSR’s foreign policy en-
counters as perhaps the most significant factor affecting the Soviet
outlook on the outside world. Since that time, the record contains
much more failure than success, but we do not perceive signs of any
fundamental Soviet reappraisal of the validity of their key doctrines.
We continue to believe, however, that the prolonged frustration of
Soviet objectives, particularly the more ambitious aims having to do

16 SEG@ET
Page-78
sel

with a world-wide conflict of systems, holds some promise over the long
run of bringing the USSR around to a view which accepts the perma-
nence of a pluralistic world. Conversely, it seems certain that successes
in expanding Soviet influence, major weakenings in Western positions,
and in particular any further advances of direct Communist rule will
act to confirm the more far-reaching hopes and expectations of the
Soviet leaders.

41. It is possible, however, that the experience of prolonged failure
to advance toward Communist objectives would bring to the fore the
more dogmatic elements in the Soviet outlook. But even if ideological
hostility should diminish in the long run, this would not bring an end
to international conflicts of interest or necessarily reduce the danger
of general war. On the contrary, even in these circumstances the re-
quirements of Soviet national security, prestige, and ambition, as seen
by the Soviet leaders and people, would still bring the USSR into fre-
quent collision with the interests of other states. The most that could
be. expected would be that some issues would become more tractable
and negotiable, particularly those not deeply rooted in the national
interests of the Soviet state, and that the occasional recognition of a
measure of common interest with the West would not invariably be
stifled by ideological hostility.

VI. THE QUESTION OF SUCCESSION

42. A key uncertainty surrounding future Soviet policy arises from
the problem of the succession to Khrushchev. The style, skill, and con-
ceptions of the top leader still play a major role in determining Soviet
choices and in the effectiveness with which policies are prosecuted.
We think, for example, that Khrushchev’s personal views and attributes
have been of major importance in shaping Soviet policies over the past
decade, and that the USSR under a different leader might have posed
significantly different problems to the US.

43. The Soviet Party appears to be no better equipped with an ac-
cepted mechanism for the designation of a successor and his orderly
assumption of power than it was a decade ago. The most likely se-
quence of events, in our view, is a repetition of the post-Stalin experi-
ence, in which the late leader’s senior associates conduct a struggle for
supremacy behind a facade of collectivity. The main arena of conflict
will be the leading party organs, but unless a single figure can gain
control fairly soon, the contenders will probably try to bolster their
strength by appealing to important interest groups outside the profes-
sional party apparatus. Of these groups, we believe that the economic
administration, weakened by continuing reorganizations, will be an
even less important political counter than when Malenkov tried to use
it after 1953, and the police would probably become a significant factor

sof 7
Page-79
soft

only in the event that a succession struggle was prolonged and was
accompanied by popular unrest which enlarged the role of the security
forces.

44. There is some reason to believe, however, that the military lead-
ership will be a substantial factor in post-Khrushchev maneuvering for
power. The special efforts to rehabilitate Stalin's military victims and
military attempts to maximize their own credit for World War II vic-
tories point to a strong sense of corporate identity among the senior
officers, although we also have evidence of conflicts among the marshals.
More important, the military leadership in the last two years has in-
creasingly asserted its own views, not always unanimous, on questions
of military doctrine and strategy; at times it has seemed even to be
giving its opinions a more general political import as well. We do not
believe that the military aspires to an independent political role in So-
viet politics, but if, as we expect, the military and economic choices
facing the USSR become more acute, the senior officers will probably
find themselves more deeply involved in matters of general policy.
Indeed, there are some present indications of party alarm on this score,
and it is possible that, before the succession question arises, steps will
be taken to restrict the political role of leading military personalities.

45. We know little about the individual policy views of Khrushchev’s
colleagues. It is clear, however, that the leadership is frequently di-
vided over policy issues, and the record of the succession struggles after
Lenin and Stalin indicates that divergent views on policy are heavily
involved in innerparty competition. So long as present trends continue
in the economy, in the relationship of East-West military power, in
Bloc relations, and in Soviet fortunes abroad, Khrushchev’s heirs will
confront a number of acute issues and decisions. His departure would
make it easier to ditch some policies to which his personal prestige
has been attached. But it would aggravate most problems by bringing
about an inevitable temporary reduction of Soviet prestige, a loss of
authority in the Communist movement, and a general uncertainty in
the country.

46. In such circumstances, it is normal for Soviet politicians to sub-
ordinate their own views to expediency and to espouse those policies
which seem most likely to serve their personal ambitions. At the same
time, a powerful weapon in this competition is a comprehensive pro-
gram which a leader can represent as promising solutions to a broad
range of problems confronting the regime; to be without a program
is a grave weakness. Thus contenders for power are under pressure
to formulate competing proposals, designed to appeal to politically
important groups, on a number of issues. Initially the tendency would
probably be for more conservative elements to gain predominance, but
the longer a succession struggle remains unresolved, the more tendency
there would be for a wider range of alternative policies to be given active

18 offer
Page-80
sft

consideration. This tendency creates the likelihood that, if the struggle
was protracted, the circle of political participation would also widen
as rivals reached out beyond the party elite for support.

47. Because of these factors, the period ushered in by Khrushchev’s
departure may present special opportunities and dangers to the US.
Relations with the non-Communist world, and particularly with the
leading rival power, are likely to be among the prime issues in any po-
litical competition, since these are intimately related to military prob-
Jems, economic difficulties, and the key questions of China and Germany.
We think it very unlikely that a “war party” will emerge in the Kremlin;
there is no evidence that other leaders take a less sober view than
Khrushchev of the consequences of nuclear war, and indeed some infor-
mation indicates that the military regard the USSR as inadequately
prepared at present to engage in one. But a faction may form which
seeks to meet the problems of internal discontent and Chinese pressure
by placing greater stress on factors of tension in East-West relations.
It is also possible that a succession struggle would generate arguments
for some accommodation with the West as a means of coping with
these same problems. At any rate, the US will almost certainly be
assailed with contrary indications, all of them difficult to interpret,
and some of them suggesting that important changes are possible
depending on the attitude adopted by the West. If Khrushchev’s de-
parture occurs at a time when existing policies are enjoying poor re-
sults, the succession period may in fact offer unusual chances for move-
ment in Soviet policy.
Page-81
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This
copy is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his
jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may
be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for
the Department of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of
the Navy
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force
Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
g. Director of intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
h. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
j. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency
2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

*

7

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance
with IAC-D-69/2, 22: June 1953.

4, The.title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-
sified: POR@FFCMALWEEORILIE

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-82
