
Page-1

Page-2
3(a)(4)(5)

1
Page-3
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 36-64

Main Trends in the Arab World

  

File ete ea
Page-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Page

THE PROBLEM ................... foot ee eee eee tebe eeee ees 1
CONCLUSIONS .......0 0... ccc cece cece eee 1
DISCUSSION .... 3
I, POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CHANGE ............0...... 3

A. The Role of the Military 2.0.00. 0.00.0. e ec eee eee 3

B. Economic and Social Development ........ 5

 

  

 

C. Area-Wide Political Forces 6

D. Prospects for Political Change . : 8

E. The Quest for Unity 20.00.0000. 0.0.00 00.00. cece eee eee 9
Tl, THEARABS ANDISRAEL .... «0.2... eee ee 10
Ill. THE ARABS AND THE WORLD_ va eee wes ta eee eee eee
Page-5
MAIN TRENDS IN
THE ARAB WORLD’

THE PROBLEM

To estimate general trends in the Arab world over the next
several years.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Political turmoil in the Arab world appears likely to con-
tinue for many years to come. The military have come to play
an increasing role, but—except in Egypt—they have not proved.
to be a stabilizing factor. Iraq and Syria in particular are likely
to remain highly unstable. The monarchies in Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, and Libya will come under increasing revolutionary na-
tionalist pressure, and one or more of them may be extinguished
in the next several years. Nasser_appears likely to remain the
single most influential Arab leader. The noteworthy economic
and social progress of the past ten years will continue, although,
as in the past, it will be uneven and varied. (Paras. 3, 5, 8-10,
16-19)

B. The emotional appeal of Arab unity will remain very strong,
but in general the pan-Arab movementis likely to be confined to the
kind of cooperation among independent countries that occurred
at the Cairo summit meeting in January 1964. (Paras. 20-22)

C. Arab attitudes toward Israel remain basically hostile, but
a fair proportion of Arabs have gradually come privately and re-
luctantly to accept the fact that Israel will exist for many years
to come. The Arab-Israeli arms race will cause tensions and
could lead to limited or selective hostile action. Other danger
points are the Jordan waters problem and the possibility of Israeli

>This estimate does not cover Sudan and the Maghreb.

—_ '
Page-6
military action in the event of a radical political change in Jordan.
Nevertheless, the general inhibitions on open warfare would be

strong, and a serious rise in tensions could probably be contained
by great power pressures. (Paras. 23-26, 29, 30)

D. Arab relations with the West remain heavily influenced
by hatred of “imperialism” and by Western support of Israel.
The possibility of a sudden deterioration of Western relations
with the Arabs over Israel is always present. The Arab national-
ists generally will press for termination of Western base rights
in the area. While they will also press for a greater share of
oil revenues and a greater degree of participation in production,
nationalization appears unlikely. (Paras. 31-33, 35)

E. The Soviets probably believe that the tide is running
against the West in the Arab world and that they can capitalize
on the unsettled political situation and upon various tensions
between the Arabs and West. If US-Arab relations should de-
teriorate sharply, there would probably be a noticeable strength-
ening of Soviet influence. We do not believe, however, that this
would result in one-sided reliance on the Soviets or a more ac-
commodating attitude toward local Communist parties. (Paras.
36-38)
Page-7
DISCUSSION

I. POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CHANGE

1. The period of the mid-1960s finds the Arab world still striving to
modernize itself. For almost all politically conscious Arabs, moderniza-
tion means land reform, industrial development, popular education, and
a general loosening of the rigid and traditional Arab society. It means
elimination of privilege and a measure of social justice for the masses.
It means independence from foreign influence, a sense of national or
Pan-Arab dignity, Arab unity, and the elimination of monarchies. It
is in transferring these desires for modernization into concrete and
practical terms that Arab society has its greatest difficulty today.

2, These ideals characterize the broad outlook of the younger middle-
class elements who in the period from the 1930s to the 1950s found
themselves excluded from power and affluence by political, economic,
and social vested interests that in most cases were allied with the West.
The new reformists sought inspiration in socialist systems and in a
variety of revolutionary doctrines which were hostile both to the exist-
ing power structure and to the Western imperial tradition. This an-
tipathy to the West and to the old regimes was greatly heightened by
Western support for the establishment of Israel. Revolution seemed the
only avenue to change, and authoritarianism the only means of effecting
speedy reform. In the absence of any strong constitutional tradition
or allegiance to the rule of law, the arbiter of change was force.

A. The Role of the Military

3. This circumstance has made the military a key factor. They have
seized power, calling themselves reformers, in Syria, Egypt, and Iraq,
and also played a role in the Yemen revolution. Once in power, how-
ever, the military have shown more concern for the ideals than for the
practice of democratic government. While they have demonstrated
sensitivity to charges of dictatorship, they distrust civilian politicians,
and the latter have lacked any effective means of maintaining or re-
establishing influence. The military regimes have severely limited or
completely suppressed conventional political activity, and the political
battles tend to be fought out within the military establishment. Thus
in Syria, a steady procession of army factions has struggled for domi-
nance, and this has resulted in chronic instability. The same appears to
be happening in Iraq despite a short interlude of Baathist civilian
government.

4. By contrast, Nasser remains the most successful practioner of revo-
lutionary modernization in the Arab world. His revolution has gathered
momentum for a dozen years. The old elite has been replaced by a new

am 3
Page-8
military one, foreign political and economic influence in internal affairs
has been eliminated, progress in industrial development has been made,
and socialism has been farther advanced than in any other Arab coun-
try. His regime’s success is due to the pasic competence of himself
and his immediate group of supporters, to a more homogeneous and
tractable population, and to the support of the armed forces. But this
success has been at the expense of growing apathy within the business
and professional classes, estrangement between the civilians and the
military, and increasing foreign indebtedness. Moreover, Nasser has
not yet succeeded in institutionalizing his revolution, and a number of its
aspects may not survive him.

5. In most of the Arab states, military forces are the base of power
and therefore important both as a prop for the regime and as a potential
source of disaffection. In the monarchies,? disaffection is directed not
only against the monarchy as an institution but against the political
forces allied with it as well.

 
 
  
  

 

4.3(a)(4)(5)

   

ve taken steps to try sure that they can contro] the armed forces
that serve them. Both the Saudi Arabian and Libyan monarchs, for
example, have built up paramilitary forces which rival the size of the
regular military establishments. The kings, nevertheless, remain vul-
nerable, and if they are overthrown, their own armed forces are likely
to deliver the coup de grace. This tendency to establish a paramilitary
force has not been confined to the monarchies. The Baathist govern-
ments in Iraq and Syria established the National Guard as a private
Baathist army since they did not trust the regular forces.

6. Virtually all the Arab countries are today characterized by au-
_thoritarian, highly centralized governments, ruling through two prin-
cipal institutions, the armed forces and the bureaucracy. Most coun-
tries lack any effective mechanism for associating the people with the
governments. Lebanon is the only country where the parliament plays
a significant role, and this is because it is a body representing the various
religious groups in a country where sectarianism is a predominant
factor in political life. The parliaments in Jordan, Kuwait, and Libya
serve primarily as a safety valve for political emotion and are free to
act so long as they do not seriously challenge the wishes of the regime.
Attempts to create political institutions to provide two-way communica-
tion between the leaders and the led in Egypt have been stifled by over-
strong control, and the latest experiment along this line will probably

 

20f the nine eastern Arab countries, four are monarchies—Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, Libya, and Kuwait; three are military republics—the UAR, Syria, and
Iraq. Lebanon is a civilian-run republic, and Yemen is impossible to classify,
part being under royal control and part under a republican government which
is in turn dependent on a foreign power, the UAR.

ee

4 aan
Page-9
suffer the same fate. In the Arab world generally, then, the central
governments call the tune in matters great and small. Civilian ele-
ments are discontented but virtually powerless in view of their lack of
cohesion and in the face of military support for the regime. Only those
organizations able and willing to function clandestinely, such as the
Baath and the Communists, continue active.

B. Economic and Social Development

7. Much of the political floundering and experimentation which have
occurred derives from disagreement over the means by which to achieve
economic and social change. Nearly all agree that progress is desirable,
but few agree on how to achieve it. Speaking in very broad terms, the
monarchies have favored cultivating private commercial, entrepreneurial
interests, which they feel will have a stake in the monarchy, and thus
become one of its main supports. The republics, in reaction to what they
regard as the excesses of the old elite and to speed reform and moderniza-
tion, have moved away from private capitalism. This is best exemplified
by Nasser’s “Arab socialism,” but the Baath also holds socialist views,
as do most of the reformist elements in the monarchies. Despite these
differences, in virtually all the states the government exercises a domi-
nant role; only it can give direction to planned development programs
and supply the large amounts of capital needed.

8. The progress that has been made in the past decade or so has been
impressive. Virtually all the Arab countries have put considerable effort
into economic and social development, relying variously on oil revenues,
foreign assistance, and such domestic resources as are available. In
the area as a.whole, education has been greatly extended and improved,
illiteracy rates are dropping, and the number of children in primary and
secondary schools has increased from about 2.6 million in 1951 to more
than 6.1 million in 1961. Medical services are improving, and other
social services, such as-cooperatives, are beginning to take some effect.
A good deal has been done in providing economic infrastructure, such
as roads, irrigation works, and electric power. Economic betterment
is reflected in the general-rise in GNP.

9. Within this general framework, progress has been uneven and
varied. Iraq’s once-promising development program has faltered badly
since Qasim overthrew the Nuri regime. A lack of appreciation for and
understanding of technical and economic processes and, until recently,
profligate spending by the royal family are among the reasons that so
little economic development has taken place in Saudi Arabia. Kuwait,
with a much larger per capita income and. more astute rulers, has
created a large measure of social and economic well-being at home and
is now financing development in several other Arab states through loans
and gifts. Egypt has made considerable progress, particularly in indus-
trialization, infrastructure, and education. We believe that the area as

— 5
Page-10
a whole will see continued economic and social change in the years

ahead, though there will be some stagnant spots, particularly in those
countries which experience political instability.

ESTIMATED PER CAPITA GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT?

 

   

(US Dollars)

Country Price LEVEL Constant Prices

Year 1953 1958 1963
Iraq ..... . 1956 $130 $170 $195
Jordan . 1962 105 (1954) 145 200
Lebanon . 1954 340 360 420
Libya? . 1961 40 155 295
Syria 1956 145 145 170
UAR? . -- 1959/60 100 110 125
Yemen - 1960 NA 70 95 (1962)

 

 

‘These figures are estimates derived from such statistics as are available
for these countries. No meaningful GNP figures for this Period are available
for Saudi Arabia and Kuwait,

*Figures are for the years 1950, 1959, and 1962.

* Fiscal years ending 30 June 1953 and 1958 figures converted at the 1963
rate ($2.30=1£E).

C. Area-Wide Political Forces

10. Nasserism. Nasser remains the prime symbol of revolutionary suc-
cess. He was, after all, the first Arab to successfully defy the great
powers and to destroy the old elite. The peak of his political fortunes
came in 1958, with the establishment of the Syro-Egyptian UAR. Nas-
ser’s difficulties in extending Cairo’s system—which is inextricably linked
with his personal control—to other countries has apparently discour-
aged him, at least for the time being, from further adventures into in-
stitutional unity. But he remains a revolutionary,-with a powerful prop-

- agarida and subversive apparatus to use against governments and forces
which he believes inimical to his interests. As the January 1964 Cairo
summit conference shows, he remains by far the most important Spokes-
man for Arab solidarity.

11. Nasser will continue to use his assets throughout the Arab world
to promote political leaders and groups sympathetic to his policies and
Objectives. He would like to see the elimination of the monarchies and
to re-establish his influence in Syria. He will feel compelled to help
any embattled Arab nationalist, from Muscat to Morocco, who requests
aid—a compulsion which keeps a third of his army tied down in Yemen.
Having failed in a frontal attack on his Arab rivals and enemies, he will,
at least for the time being, seek to increase his influence over them by
exploiting the noncontroversial issues of Israel and imperialism. But
at the same time he will not abandon his ultimate objective of bringing
down his Arab rivals. Nevertheless, the failure of his Syrian venture
Page-11
Seeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee reer

and the political and military costs of the Yemen affair may have taught

him some lessons, and he will therefore probably be more cautious than

in the past about unification experiments where he is uncertain of his
] power to control the situation.

12. Baathism. Nasser’s leadership and influence are being challenged
by the Baath (Arab Resurrection) movement. The Baath is a unique
political organization in the Arab world; it is an Arab unity movement
based on an ideology rather than on personal leadership, and it has an
apparatus functioning in nearly every Arab state. The Baath is social-
ist in character; it has been bitterly opposed to both imperialism and
communism virtually since its inception in Syria during World War Il.
By 1957, the Baath Party was the strongest political force in Syria.
Reacting to pressure from the West and fearful of a Communist seizure
of power, it felt impelled to seek unity with Egypt. But Baathist infilu-
ence in the union declined, and by mid-1959 the party found itself out
of office and out of power. In the same year, Baathist elements in Bagh-
dad bungled an attempt to assassinate Qasim, and the party was forced
underground there.

13. The Baathists reorganized in secret and, early in 1963, seized power
first in Iraq and then in Syria. Almost immediately the new regimes
began to discuss with Nasser the establishment of a federal state, and
agreement to do so was announced in April. It soon became apparent
that the Baath could not accept Nasser’s desire for a tight federation
and personal rule. Thus the unity move collapsed amid mutual recrimi-
nations, and both sides are likely to continue to be embroiled in a feud
for a long while to come.

14. Once in office, the Baathists were weakened by internal party fric-
tions and by their antagonizing of potential supporters. In Iraq, a
breakdown of party discipline gave non-Baathist elements in the army
an opportunity to reassert their powér and do away with Baathist con-
trol of the government. In the process, a number of Baathist officers
turned out to be more devoted to their service than to the party. In Syria,
Baathists within the military have asserted predominance over civilian
Baathists, and even the Baathist military appear to be more concerned
with their own supremacy than with the advancement of party objec-
tives. In short, Syria is coming yet again to look more like a military
dictatorship than a revolutionary regime. Nonetheless, the party re-
mains a force in the Arab world, with a demonstrated ability to survive
severe shocks. For some time to come, moreover, it will probably retain
appeal as a Pan-Arab movement independent of Nasser or any other
personal leader, and as a rallying point for anti-Nasser elements. What-
ever may be its fate in the republics, its strength in Libya and Jordan
appears such that it could emerge as a major factor in any struggle
for power following the demise of either king.

aan 7
Page-12
15. Communism. A Communist apparatus of some sort exists in vir-
tually every Arab state, and the movement has been well organized in
the past in Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Iraq. Just after World War II,
communism threatened to emerge as the most effective antagonist of
the status quo. More recently, the rise of nationalist movements has
provided an alternative far more appealing to the intensely chauvinistic
Arabs. In any event, the tight control exercised by almost all the gov-
ernments over labor unions, the press, and other areas of conventional
Communist activity makes it very difficult for the Communists to oper-
ate as anything more than a clandestine and oppressed party. Never-
theless, in the turmoil which might follow the overthrow of a regime,
there is a possibility for Significant growth of Communist strength or
influence, particularly if the emerging leader felt the need to cultivate
the Communists to strengthen his position against internal or external
threats, as Qasim did in Iraq.

D. Prospects for Political Change

16. Revolutionary nationalist pressures on the monarchies of Saudi
Arabia, Jordan, and Libya will remain strong. All three will continue
to rely primarily on the support of tribal and propertied elements to
counter growing pressure from socialist and Tepublican elements that
regard the institution itself as outmoded and a vehicle of Western
influence. They might reduce their vulnerability to some extent by
acting like neutralists. But their survival probably depends more im-
portantly on their ability to maintain a balance between firmness and
concessions at home. Advances toward liberalism and reform often
not only antagonize the elements supporting the monarchs, but stimu-
late the very forces that the rulers seek to dampen, and thus necessitate
a return to repression, which in turn feeds the impulse to revolution.
Although the monarchies do not appear to be in immediate danger, the
death of the ruler or any other shock to the equilibrium could unleash
political forces that these regimes would find it difficult to control. In
some cases, feuds within the ruling family could provide an entering
wedge for nationalist forces.

17. Libya will be particularly vulnerable on the death of the aging
King Idris. There is already a substantial Pro-Republican element
among the politically conscious. The monarchy is not a deeply-rooted
institution in Libya, and Idris’ designated successor commands little
respect or support in the country. Special circumstances make the
Jordanian and Saudi monarchies somewhat less vulnerable. In Jordan,
many potential opposition leaders recognize that an upset in Jordan
could trigger Israeli military action. In Saudi Arabia, the large size of
the Saud family and the dispersion of power among several centers im-
pedes the chances of a successful cou; , and opposition leadership is
not impressive. Nonetheless, one or more of the monarchies might be
extinguished in the next several years.
Page-13
18. Nasser seems likely to remain in power in Egypt. In the other
republics, changes in leadership are likely, though the military will
almost certainly continue to exercise a predominant influence in political
affairs. They will, however, be hard put to cope with problems of gov-
ernment. Iraq is beset with a number of problems which will put great
pressure on the existing government. Iraqi opinion is divided over a
number of factors—Moslem sectarianism, the form and character of
Arab unity, centralization of government, and the role of minorities. In
particular, Kurdish desires for Jocal autonomy could occasion a new
round of fighting. President Arif himself is not popular nor, indeed,
does he appear very competent. at the art of governing. These and other
difficulties are likely to culminate in moves against the present regime.

19. In Syria, there is no sign of an abatement of the interminable in-
trigues which have occasioned at least 10 successful coups in the past
15 years. Both the army and the civilian politicians are deeply divided
by differences concerning religion, ideology, and Arab unity; personal
antipathies and sheer opportunism also play a major role in perpetuating
political instability. Plotting is incessant, and the chances of an over-
throw of the existing regime are high. In both Iraq and Syria, the
likelihood is that successive coups will produce a shifting, unstable, and
jnereasingly violent political atmosphere for a good while to come.

E, The Quest for Unity

20. Despite all these diversities and instabilities, the concept of Arab
unity retains a very powerful appeal. The intelligentsia believe that
the Arabs are one people—the Ummah Arabiyah—and that by right they
should be politically united. Arab political thought on this issue has
been largely in terms of what should be, with little attention to devising
practical ways and means of bringing it about. Arab spokesmen have
traditionally blamed their lack of unity on the political divisions imposed
on the Arab areas by the Western powers. There is some truth to this,
put local and dynastic interests have created strong frictions within the
Arab world and will continue to impede moves toward unity. Moreover,
the Arabs have had little experience with the kind of political give-and-
take which is necessary to govern a nation with varied and divergent
interests. Such steps toward unity as have been taken, e.g., the Syro-
Egyptian UAR and the short-lived Iraqi-Jordanian Union, were made
almost as a last resort against what the advocates of union considered
to be serious threats to their own position.

21, Virtually all nationalist and republican elements look to a unified
Arab state as an ideal, but they are beginning to recognize the formidable
obstacles to achieving it. The most that now appears to be realizable
is a grouping of nationalist governments in the individual states, more
capable of showing solidarity on specific issues, such as opposition to
Israel, than of taking steps toward full union. There is some possibility

a ’
Page-14
that two states might, whether because of favorable circumstances (such

occurred when the Baath ruled in Syria and Iraq) or of external pres-
sure, find it expedient to unite, Once the circumstances which impelled
unity had changed, however, fissiparous tendencies would soon reappear.

imperatives of local Power and interest. A modest Solidarity, such as
was manifested at the Cairo summit meeting, probably represents the
outer limits of Cooperative action under Presently foreseeable circum-
stances,

22. There are a number of areas where such cooperation might occur.
The inter-Arab military command set up at the Cairo summit meeting
is being organized, and several states have made financia) contributions
to pay for strengthening the armies of Israel’s neighbors. There are
some possibilities for cooperation on economic matters, such as broader
use of oil revenues. The Arab League has shown some potential for

Il, THE ARABS AND ISRAEL

23. Arab Solidarity is Strongest on the question of animosity towards
Israel. Even here, attitudes have shifted Slowly and imperceptibly since
the middle fifties, when many Arabs saw visions of themselves—for the

humiliation suffered at the hands of Israel in 1948. Awareness has slowly
Spread that, even with a large arms inventory, the Arabs are a long time
away from being able to impose their will on Israel. This. awareness,

the possibilities of the situation to be. Their basic hostility remains,
and they almost certainly hope that circumstances will some day change
in a manner which will permit them to destroy the Israeli state.

24. While we believe that neither the Arabs nor the Israelis are dis-
Posed deliberately to initiate hostilities, there are a number of problems
which could lead to a serious rise of Arab-Israeli tensions, Among these
are the diversions of Jordan River waters, the disposition of over a
million Palestinian refugees, the arms race between the UAR and Israel,
and the possibility of a radical change in the character of the Jordanian

regime,

10 aa
Page-15
~-e

25. Jordan Waters. The most striking example of the change in Arab
attitudes toward Israel was the stand taken at the recent Arab Summit
conference. Arab leaders responded eargerly to Nasser’s call for such a
meeting, partly to show solidarity and partly to divide the responsibility
if they were unable to devise a way of halting Israeli diversion of the
waters of the Jordan River. With the exception of Premier Hafiz of
Syria, they faced up to the fact that there was little they could do to
prevent Israeli diversion. They agreed that Arab action would be post-
poned until a joint military command had been established and the
Arab armies had been built up. Only when this had been done and
the Arab hand strengthened, would plans to divert water from the Jordan
sources which lie in the Arab lands be carried out.

26. Serious difficulties could arise if the Arabs try to take more than
their “fair share” of the waters of the Jordan basin. The Arabs have
a good claim to roughly the proportion of the waters allotted them under
the Johnston Plan and have intimated that they will probably stay
within the Johnston allocations. The Israelis have made it clear that
they would regard Arab diversion of more than this as grounds for war.
We believe they would carry out such threats, and that the Arabs, be-
lieving it too, are unlikely to test the Israelis. This is not to say that
the disposition of the waters will cause no disturbances. Both the
Israelis and the Arabs are likely to claim that the other side is drawing
excessive amounts of water. Diplomatic duels and verbal battles over
the issue, as well as incidents along the Syrian border, are likely to flare
up periodically.

27. The Refugee Question.s Arab attitudes—at least public atti-
tudes—on the issue of the Arab refugees are as intransigent as ever.
The Arabs continue to insist that the refugees be given the option of
returning to their former homes. Israel, for its part, remains equally
adamant that any refugee resettlement. plan-must ‘explicitly provide
that only a small minority of the refugees may return to Israel. We see
no early change in Arab or Israeli attitudes on this issue, since every
scheme thus far devised would appear to be a major, public defeat for
one side or the other.

28. If there is little prospect for a formal settlement of the refugee
issue, however, there is some reason to hope that the problem may be at
least partially solved by developments within the Arab states themselves,
particularly as the older generation of leaders dies off and people with-

*There are about 1,210,000 refugees registered with the UN authorities. As
of June 1963 they were located approximately as follows: Jordan—654,000; UAR
(Gaza Strip) —279,000; Syria—127,000; Lebanon—150,000. About two-thirds of
these receive food rations from the UN. There are substantially fewer refugees
than the figures indicate, as deaths are often not reported to the authorities.
However, there has been a large net gain, due to natural increase, over the ap-
proximately 700,000 who left that portion of Palestine which is now Israel.
Page-16
out personal experience of Palestine grow to maturity. A fair propor-
tion of the refugees in Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan have in effect already
been largely absorbed into the local economies. On the other hand, those
under UAR control—nearly all of whom are in the overcrowded Gaza |
Strip—have little prospect of finding a respectable existence in the Arab :
world in the foreseeable future. All things considered, we see little |
likelihood that the refugee problem will make Arab-Israeli differences

worse, but it will remain a major barrier to settlement.

29. The Arms Race.* Israel and Egypt have engaged in an arms race
since 1955, when Soviet arms were first made available to Egypt. The
Israelis, while scornful of past Arab military performances, believe they
would be vulnerable to attack by advanced weapons or by substantially :
strengthened conventional forces. They therefore seek an improved .
military posture to deter such attacks. Israel’s Arab neighbors in turn
are fearful of any improvement in Israeli capabilities. Both countries
_are now developing surface-to-surface missiles.

 
   

 

1.3(2)(4)15)

As

“holdings of conventional arms grow and advanced weapons development
Programs progress, tensions are likely to rise. Both sides will become
increasingly uneasy, and each might be tempted to initiate hostile action
on a limited or selective scale to destroy the facilities or armaments of
the other. Nevertheless, the general inhibitions upon open warfare
would be very strong, and the chances are good that a serious rise in
tensions could be contained through diplomatic and Political pressures
from outside the area. - we

--- 80. Major Political Change in Jordan. The Israelis and the Jordanians '
have achieved a fairly stable modus vivendi along the border. Never-
theless, the Israelis have long been concerned over the danger that a
different regime in Jordan could pose for them. They have indicated
that if Hussein were overthrown, and particularly if the successor regime
were pro-Nasser, they might feel compelled to seize the area between
their present borders and the Jordan River. The likelihood of such
action would, of course, depend greatly upon circumstances existing at
the time and upon the attitude of the great powers, particularly the .
US. If the Israelis should in fact move against the West Bank, Nasser
would feel obliged to make some military demonstration, but he would

. urge international action and look to the great powers to force Israel
to retreat.

2 am
Page-17
ae

Il. THE ARABS AND THE WORLD

31. The West. The Arabs are attracted by the image of the Western
countries as modern nations, capable of playing an important role in
international affairs and of providing a decent life for their people. The
latter outlook influences Arab society in matters of education and eco-
nomic development, but memories of colonial control tend to dominate
much Arab thinking about international issues. In particular, all Arab
nationalists are hostile to Western military bases in the area and to the
special position which the West enjoys in most of the oil-producing areas.
They continue to regard these as relics of the “imperial” era which must
be eliminated. They view the US as the principal supporter of Israel.

32. Within this general context, there is a difference between the
monarchies and the military republics on attitudes toward the West.
The republics generally espouse a nonaligned posture, eschewing com-
plete reliance on either bloc and willing to play one off against the
other. This nonalignment does not reduce their opposition to special
‘Western positions in and around the Arab world or deter them from
active campaigns against these positions. The monarchies, on the other
hand, are aware of their greater dependence on Western support; Jordan
lives on US budgetary assistance, and the other monarchies get sub-
stantial revenues from Western operated oil concessions. They are less
hostile to the Western positions because they look to the West for support
against the republican reformists. Public opinion in the Arab world gen-
erally supports the revolutionary republican rather than the monarchist
attitude toward these Western interests. Therefore, the monarchies
probably will be forced to continue to placate nationalist sentiment by
going along with it to a certain extent on “anti-imperialist” issues, as for
example Libya has in respect of the Wheelus Base agreement.

33. The possibility of a sudden deterioration of relations between the
Arabs and West, particularly the US and particularly over Israel, is
always present. The Arabs are so sensitive regarding US-Israeli rela-
tions that even quite innocuous US statements and actions are taken
as proof of their fears for the worst. Indeed, Western relations with
the Arabs now appear to be headed into an extremely difficult period over
the Israeli question: Nasser is making a special effort to regain influ-
ence among the Arab states by leading a campaign against the Western
position in the area, which he represents as supporting Israel. Thus, he
has begun again to encourage hostility to US and UK base rights in Libya,
Cyprus, and Aden. He apparently hopes over the longer term to elim-
imate these Western bases and weaken the Western hold on the oil
concessions sufficiently to oblige the West to give up its support of Israel.

34. The British position in Aden is likely to come under increasing
pressure from the Arab nationalists. They see Aden, not only as the
base from which the British support the royalists in Yemen, but also

 

Ts "8
Page-18
as the key to the British position in the Persian Gulf and in Muscat and
Oman. This position, in Arab eyes, is still a bastion of old-style colonial-
ism which must be eliminated. The British are determined to retain
their political and military position, which they regard—at least for the
present—as essential to insure their access to a reliable supply of oil
at an acceptable price and to substantial foreign exchange earnings to
buttress their balance-of-payments position. Nevertheless, their posi-
tion is likely to come increasingly under challenge, particularly in Aden,
where a large and articulate group, supported by Nasser, is agitating
for a greater political role and eventual British withdrawal.

35. Despite these various threats to the Western Position, Western oil
concessions are a strong factor linking the Arabs with the West.
Steadily increasing production may by 1970 boost area revenues as much
as 50 percent for the area as a whole, and the Arabs recognize increas-
ingly that this revenue is to a large degree dependent upon the marketing
and distribution system controlled by the Western concessionaries.
Nevertheless, many Arabs are seeking not only a larger share of revenues
but also a greater degree of participation in production and distribution.
They are pressing both issues in the Organization of Petroleum Export-
ing Countries (OPEC) discussions with the companies. If the com-
panies accede to some of the pressures, for example, by reliquishing con-
cession areas and granting a larger share of the Profits, this pressure
can probably be contained. The chance of some leader nationalizing a
company cannot be ruled out, but such an action appears unlikely.

36. The Communists. In their efforts to acquire influence in the Arab
World, the Soviets have generally relied on government-to-government
dealings rather than on local Communist movements. They apparently
considered that the Arab Communist parties had_some capability for
. harassing conservative and pro-Western regimes; but that they had

‘little chance to gain commanding positions. We believe that govern-
ment-to-government ties will continue to be the pattern for Soviet-Arab
relations, although there will be fluctuations in cordiality from time
to time.

37. The Arabs are aware of the dangers of too close a relationship with
the Communist powers. But they will almost certainly continue to see
many benefits to be obtained from dealing with them—modern arms,
economic aid, and ability to use their presence and support both to obtain
greater benefits from the West and to pursue the drive against Western
“imperialism.” Soviet influence would be strengthened by any in-
creased US support of Israel. Indeed, if US-Arab relations deteriorate
markedly there probably will be a noticeable swing of the pendulum
toward the Soviets, though we doubt that such a movement would result
in one-sided Arab reliance on the Soviets, unless the Arabs come to be-
lieve the US had irrevocably chosen to support Israel against them. In
particular, we doubt that Arab leaders would be more accommodating to

M4 am

 

+
)
|
Page-19
|

 

local Communist parties, for these leaders have learned through experi-
ence that, as long as they maintain an “anti-imperialist” stance, they
can keep local Communists under close control without cutting them-
selves off from Soviet support.

38. The prime objective of both the USSR and Communist China is
to eliminate the important Western positions in the Middle East. Despite
the setbacks and obstacles which they have encountered, the Soviets
probably still believe that their position may improve over the longer
term. They believe that there are vulnerabilities in the area which
they can exploit and in time convert into tangible assets. In particu-
lar, they probably see opportunities arising from the unsettled political
situations in Syria and Iraq, continuing Kurdish unrest, the quarrels
between nationalist leaders, and the various and recurrent tensions be-
tween the Arabs and the West. They feel that the tide of opinion in
the Arab world is running against the special US and UK positions
in the area and that once these are eliminated it will be time enough
to deal with the conflict between Arab nationalism and the local Com-
munist movement.
Page-20
