
Page-1
SECREF Memorandum to
Holders of

NIE 11-4-65
NIE 11-5-65

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM 5 August 1965
RELEASE IN FULL

MEMORANDUM. [8/2
To Holders of

 

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-4-65
NUMBER 11-5-65

Main Trends in Soviet Military Policy

Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

5 AUGUST 1965

SONFROMED-DISSEM Ne 425
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and NSA.

Concurring:

Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:

The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the Assistant to the
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
jurisdiction.

ARPT
This

esialcontains information affecting the National Defense of is ites
within the meaning of the 63 WEIN ST, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-

Blation of which in any manner to an unauthorized 7 Bifed.
Page-3
Memorandum to Holders of

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 11-4-65

 
 

Main Trends in Soviet Military Policy

Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects
Page-4
MEMORANDUM TO HOLDERS OF

NIE 11-4-65: MAIN TRENDS IN SO-
VIET MILITARY POLICY

NIE 11-5-65: SOVIET ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS

THE PROBLEM

To estimate trends in the level and allocation of Soviet defense
expenditures over the past several years.

NOTE

NIE 11-4-65, “Main Trends in Soviet Military Policy” (14 April
1965, SECRET), estimates the main trends in Soviet military thinking
policy, and programs. This Memorandum supplements the exami-
nation of economic factors in paragraphs 16 and 17 of that estimate.
It supersedes the estimates in paragraph 23 of NIE 11-5-65, “Soviet
Economic Problems and Prospects” (22 January 1965, SECRET). It
does not supersede the judgments made in both NIE 11-4-65 and
NIE 11-5-65 concerning the effects of defense programs on general

economic trends; we believe that these judgments remain essentially
valid.

Soviet military forces costed in this estimate represent single value
selections from within the ranges appearing in current NIEs and other
USIB issuances. For the period since 1955, a systematic review was
made to restate the historical pattern of Soviet defense programs as
seen from the vantage point of 1965.

Only limited data on Soviet military expenditures are directly avail-
able from intelligence. The single figure given for defense in the
annual Soviet published budget is not all-inclusive, nor does it indicate

“SECRET : 1
Page-5
—SECREF-

the composition of defense expenditures. Moreover, to a significant
degree, our estimates of the costs of Soviet weapon systems are
synthesized by analogy to the costs of US equipment, which involves
conceptual and practical difficulties. These problems, together with
uncertainties in our estimates of the size and composition of Soviet
forces, of necessity contribute to the range of uncertainty involved
in the resultant figures both as to total expenditures and allocation
by mission.
Page-6
SEGRE

DISCUSSION

1. Our analysis indicates that annual Soviet defense expenditures have re-
mained at about 17 billion rubles during the 1962-1964 period.' Historically,
however, these expenditures have shown considerable change over the past
decade, declining in 1956 and 1957 and then rising from about 14% billion
rubles in 1958 to about 17 billion in 1962. The impact of these programs on
the machinery and equipment sector of the economy has been particularly
great; expenditures on military machinery during 1959-1964 rose faster than
total defense expenditures.

 

2, The main impetus for the growth in total military expenditures during
the 1958-1962 period was provided by the continuing buildup in forces for
strategic attack and defense and by extensive research and development and

"space programs. These increases were partially offset by a continuing decrease
in expenditures for general purpose forces. In 1963 and 1964, expenditures
for strategic defense forces and, more especially, those for research and de-
velopment continued to increase. Expenditures for strategic attack forces
decreased somewhat, reflecting the completion of the MR/IRBM deployment
programs and the pause between the end of the deployment program for
second-generation ICBMs and the beginning of the new single-silo ICBM
program. Meanwhile, expenditures for general purpose forces remained fairly
constant.

3. We estimate that in 1964 the Soviets allocated about 35 percent of their
defense expenditures to general purpose forces,? about 15 percent to strategic
attack forces, and about 15 percent to strategic defense forces. Space pro-
grams and military research and development absorbed more than 20 percent.*
The remainder was used for general command and support functions.*

4. The differences between these and previous estimates of Soviet defense
costs result primarily from significant changes in our estimates of the size
and nature of some Soviet force strengths and military programs (especially

‘Our estimates of Soviet defense expenditures include costs of nuclear weapons, space,
and military R and D, much of which is covered in Soviet budget accounts other than
“defense.” US and Soviet expenditures cannot be adjusted for precise comparability, but
the 1964 level of the dollar valuation of Soviet defense expenditures is believed to be
approximately 80 percent of US expenditures.

“Including estimated expenditures for ground forces, tactical and naval aviation, military
air transport, and naval forces (except ballistic-missile submarines, which are included in
Strategic Attack).

“Including estimated R and D expenditures for military equipment, nuclear energy, and
all space programs. Our estimate of R and D expenditures is derived from analysis of
published Soviet financial data and does not represent detailed calculations of R and D
activities.

‘Including estimated expenditures for reserve forces, paramilitary training, and mili-
tarized security forces in addition to command and support for the active military estab-
lishment.

“SECRET : 3
Page-7
SECRET

with respect to manpower and missile systems), and in estimates of expendi-
tures for research and development and for land armanients.* They also
result from changes in costing methods and from refinements in analysis.
Our calculations are subject to varying degrees of uncertainty, but we believe
them adequate to support the general judgments presented above concerning
trends in Soviet defense expenditures.*

©In consonance with our judgment expressed in NIE 11-14-64 that the evidence is not
adequate for an estimate of land armaments production within useful ranges of confidence
the production figures used for computing expenditures for such production were de-
veloped from assumed requirements in order to permit inclusion of expenditures for land
armaments in the gross total.

®The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, and the Assistant
Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF note that the present single-valuc estimates of Soviet
defense expenditures are at considerable variance with a number of previous estimates.
They consider that the uncertainties are too great to support a judgment as to the general
trend of Soviet defense expenditures, particularly for recent years.
Page-8

Page-9
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This decument was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officicls within their respective departments:

 

a. Director o' jell,

 
 

nd Research, for the Department of State

ence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of

the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army .

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), for the Department of the

Navy

v. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

Director of Intelligence, AEC, for ihe Atomic Energy Commission

9. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

   

b. Director, Defense Int

 

Defense «

 

» Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Depariment or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year, At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69 2, 22 June 1953.

4. The tithe of this document when used separalcly from the text should be clas-

sified: “FOR-OFFIGH-USE-ODILY

DISTRIBUTION:
White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-10
