
Page-1
SECRET Ni i 1-0-6/

CODFROHEDDISGEM SNIE 11-9-68
16 May 1968

MEMORANDUM TO HOLDERS
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 11-6-67

Soviet Strategy and Intentions in the

Mediterranean Basin

and

SPECIAL NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 11-9-68

Soviet Interests and Activities in Arab States

Submitted by

Ads on AA bso
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleat

16 May 1968

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

Authenticated:

- of
ARECUTIVE aber.

SECRET N? 525
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizotions of the Depart-
ments of State ond Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:
Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence

Mr. Thomas t. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence ond Research, Department
of State

Lt. Gen. Joseph F. Carroll, the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Lt. Gen, Marshall §. Carter, the Director, National Security Agency

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission

Abstaining:

‘Mr. William O. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the subject being outside of his jurisdiction.

WARRTNC

         
    

This ins information affecting the National Defense of thy 1d States
within the meaning of the esp ‘and 794, the trans-
mission of " vl anner to an unauthort is prohibited.
Page-3
NOTE

NIE 11-6-67, “Soviet Strategy and Intentions in the Mediterranean
Basin,” dated 1 June 1967, SECRET/CONTROLLED DISSEM, esti-
mated long-term Soviet plans and intentions in the Mediterranean
and Red Sea basins. The estimate was issued on the eve of the Arab-
Israeli war, and therefore did’not deal with the immediate tactical
considerations underlying Soviet policy during the crisis itself. SNDE
11-9-68, “Soviet Interests and Activities in Arab States,” dated 18 Jan-
uary 1968, SECRET, assessed Soviet policy toward the Middle East
in the period following the June war, and estimated Soviet intentions,
particularly with respect to the UAR, Yemen, and Jordan.

This Memorandum brings up to date the information bearing on
the main judgments expressed in NIE 11-6-67 and SNIE 11-9-68,
especially with respect to the growth of the Soviet naval squadron in
' the Mediterranean and the threat it poses to US naval forces. We
believe that the basic judgments in both estimates remain valid.

DISCUSSION

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

1. During ithe past year the political and even more the military presence of
the USSR in the Mediterranean area has increased. Since the Arab-Israeli war,
in particular, the composition of the Soviet Mediterranean squadron has normally
included 10-14 surface combatants, 6-9 submarines, and 10-12 auxiliary/support
ships. The squadron reached its highest level in April 1968 when it numbered
some 9 or 10 submarines and 34 surface ships, 11 of which are classified as major
combatant vessels. Soviet ships have paid long, frequent, and conspicuous calls
in UAR ports, and have also visited Syria, Yugoslavia, and Algeria. Since last

July, the Soviets-have-maintained a repair-ship and diving tender in: Alexandria:

to perform occasional maintenance or minor repairs on surface vessels and sub-
marines. The USSR has acquired fuel storage facilities at Port Said. Elements
of the Soviet: squadron have engaged in tactical exercises in the Eastern Mediter-
ranean on a gradually increasing scale. And there’ have been recent instances
of surveillance of a Sixth Fleet carrier by TU-16 aircraft with UAR markings.

2. Besides these manifestations, Soviet military advisers and technicians for
much of the period since the June war have numbered as high as some 2,000 in the

= SEGRE Ld. ove d
Page-4
~SEERET—

UAR (although the number is now probably somewhat less) and 1,000 in Syria,
thus more than doubling their numbers since before the war; the influence of these
advisers has probably. increased; and they now appear to be operating at lower
as well as higher echelons of the UAR's and Syria's military establishments.
Soviet strategic aircraft have made several visits to Arab states, an occurrence
unprecedented before the June war. Soviet Defense Minister Grechko recently
visited Syria, Iraq, and the UAR, and the USSR recently concluded an arms
agreement with the Sudan.

3. Meanwhile, US influence among the Arabs has diminished because of what
the latter consider US-Israeli collusion during and since the war. Contacts
between the US and those Arab states most closely involved in the conflict with
Israel have been markedly unfruitful; the UAR and Syria have become increas-
ingly dependent upon Soviet military and political assistance; and even Jordan
was for a time hard pressed to avoid recourse to the Soviet source of supply.
France has virtually terminated its previous supply of arms to Israel (although
there is a chance that Israel will eventually get the 50 Mirage-5 zircraft for which
it has contracted), and has adopted a sympathetic attitude toward the Arab
cause; but its activities are not likely to forward the interests of the US. Mean-
while it has withdrawn from its naval base at Mers-el-Kebir in Algeria. And the
rapid disappearance of British influence has been accelerated by withdrawal
from Aden, partial withdrawal from Libya and Malta, and the announcement
of departure from the Persian Gulf by the end of 1971.

4. On the other hand, the forces of nationalism and conservatism in the area
remain strong obstacles to the extension of Soviet influence. The UAR, Syria,
and Algeria are friends and to a degree clients of the USSR, but they are still
jealous of their independence and are resentful of Soviet restraints on their
ambitions. The Governments of Iran, Turkey, and Morocco have increased and
extended their relationships with the Soviets, but their sympathies continue to be
more with the West than with the USSR. -The policies of Saudi Arabia and
Ethiopia are basically unchanged and will probably remain so as long as their
present leaders retain power. :

SOVIET INTENTIONS AND OBJECTIVES

5. The immediate purpose of the heightened Soviet naval acti ity has probably,
been to leiid’a show of support to the Arab side inthe diplomatic fencing which
has followed the June war. In this respect it complemented the rapid Soviet
military resupply of Arab states, and helped to restore the Soviet prestige which
was at least temporarily tarnished during the conflict itself. On a broader scale,
Soviet naval activities are intended to impress both the Arab states and Israel
with Soviet military strength and flexibility and to inform the world at large,
and the US in particular, that the Mediterranean can no longer be accounted an
American lake.
Page-5
&

—SEERET-

6. The Soviets are helping the UAR, Syria, and Yemen to develop ports and
air bases. These are used at present by the USSR to some degree, though we
do not know what Soviet rights would be in. periods of high tension. We still
do not believe that the Soviets intend to establish military bases of their own in
the area—in the sense, for example, that Yokosuka in Japan is an American naval
base. In our view, they would consider such an act politically disadvantageous
and militarily unnecessary. To support their naval operations they will probably
continue to rely principally on auxiliary ships, much as the US does in the Medi-
terranean.

7. Assuming that there is no major crisis in the Middle East, the Soviets are
not likely in the next two or three years to increase the size of their Mediterranean
squadron much above the high levels of the recent past. They will probably
continue to improve its capabilities by assigning newer and more effective ships
on a regular basis: cruise missile and nuclear attack submarines, including new

_ Classes with improved antisubmarine warfare capabilities; and the Moskva-class

helicopter carrier. In the event of hostilities against the US, the primary mission
of this force would be to neutralize the US strategic attack capabilities,

8. Nevertheless, the main function of the Soviet Mediterranean squadron is
political and is likely to remain so for at least some years to come. This raises
the broad question of the USSR’s intentions with respect to the application of its
conventional military power in support of its foreign policy objectives: In the
Mediterranean and Middle Eastern area, this is largely a matter of establishing a
substantial military presence to make a display, to demonstrate the existence of
a Soviet interest, and to be able to Support such an interest without actually
having to fight. It may be noted that if the Suez Canal were open, the Soviets
could use elements of the Mediterranean squadron to establish at least an inter-
mittent naval presence in support of Soviet interests in the Red Sea and the
Persian Gulf.

9. Projected improvements in Soviet air and sealift capabilities over the next
several years will give the Soviets greater capabilities to support their Arab clients
during periods of regional tension. The Soviets may, in fact, be increasingly
inclined to deploy their ships specifically in support of friendly states; some of
their Egyptian port calls in the period following the June war were almost cer-
tainly in response to Cairo’s desire to deter possible Israeli attacks. Moreover,
the almost constant presence of Soviet landing ships in the Mediterranean since
the June war suggests that Moscow wishes to indicate that it might land troops
in the area. Yet such landing forces as the Soviets are likely to maintain in the .
Mediterranean will probably be insufficient for operations on any large or ex-
tended scale, or against more than token opposition. .

=-SECRE— ~ 3.
Page-6
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

9

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Novy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

{. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
+h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
i. Director of Central. Reference Service, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Central Reference Service, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text shovid be clas-
Sified: ERM RRLGIEERONLY

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-7
