
Page-1
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

22 November 1960

SUBJECT: NIE.30-60: MIDDLE EAST OIL

THE PROBLEM (Ss Q

To estimate probable trends affecting Mic@le East of] and
their political anc eccnomic implications over the next five

years or S0s#

SCOPE NOTE

This estimate does not attempt to give detailed information

on the production and consumption of Middle East 011; as such
infcrmation is elready available in various forms. What we

prepose in this estimate is a nontechnical summary of major

 

% The term Middle East is here used to include Egypt and the
Arat States east of Suez, Iran, and Israel. Develcpments
in Libya anc other North African areas are ecnsicered only
ee they affect the Micdle Easte

esenmvatenrntnie tamination nee ia
Page-2
i
sf

trends affecting Middle East oil and an assessment of their
bread political anc ec-ncmic implications, including the
problems likely to be raised for US interests, We avcid

specific discussion of the strategic importance of oil and of -
wartime c.ntinzencics. We believe, for at least the period

of this estimate, the picture will not be sienificantly

affectec by the development of nuclear y;ower or cther new

sources of enerzye

 

CONCLUSIONS

Ae A major factor in the world cil picture for the next
several years will be the continuing surplus of procucing
capacity. This will be added to by new sources in North
Africa and by expanded Soviet exports, as well as by increased
capacity in the Micdle East. As a result, Western Europe
will craw a somewhat smaller percentaje of its petroleum
requirements from the Middle Ecst. Nevertheless, it will
remain heavily cependent cn the areas The oil-procucing
Middle Eastern countries are likely tc continue to get
enough revemue to sujj-ort substantial cevelopment programse

Incividual sources of oil may be shut down and transit facilities

-2-

f
Page-3
yr

may be blocked temporarily, but we believe a lestinz areawide
breakdown is unlikely curing the period of this estimates

(Parase 6, 29-30, 35) -

B, Growing pressures from the producing countries will
probably result in major changes in the present ecncession
pattern of Middle East oile The 50/50 profit-sharing formula
now stancare in the incustry will provably give way and

greater participation by local governments in the management

 

of the cil ccmpanies is likely. We do not believe, however,
that larve scale naticnalization of industry facilities is
likely or that the c mpanies will feel ecmpelled to liquicate
their interests in the area curing the period of this estimate.

(Paras. 19-25, 31-33)

Ce By 1965 the USSR will probably control about seven
percent of the oil moving in international trade. This will
enable the Soviet Union to upset markets in various individual
ecnsuming ccuntries and even to dis} lace Western ecmpanies in
some smaller markets. Together with an expanded pro:ram of
Soviet technical anc economic assistance for the cevelopment
of new facilities in Asia anc Africa, it will make the USSR

a force to be reckoned with in the international petroleum

-3-
Page-4
cr

field. We do not believe, however, that the USSR will be

able to upset the preponcerant josition of the Western ccmpanies
nor destroy the present overall pattern of the Middle East oil -
ineustry. Even a Communist takeover in cne of the producing
countries would not necessarily result in a refuscl to sell

the country's of] to the West. (Paras. 11-18, 3h)

 
 

De On balance, we think the odds are against any develop=- s :
ments in revard to Micdle East oil critically cetrimental to ws as
national interests curing the period of this estimate. Never-
theless, the US will be faced with a number of bread problems.

Among these will be cctermination of the balance of interest
between the desirability of developing alternate sources cf

cil to meet Western Eurcpe's needs anc the importance of

assurin; Middle Eastern countries of sufficient oil revenue

to avoid instability; resolution of possible conflicts cf
interest between the US and its Western allics, especially

the UK and France; und the difficulty of determining in particular
circumstances whether and how US strategic and commercial

interests ccincide or conflict. (Parase 34-39)
Page-5
f=
DISCUSSION

I. THE IMPORTANCE OF MIDDLE EAST OIL -
To the Free World

1. Two geographical areas, the Miccle East anc the Western

Hemisphere, provide between them 9 percent cf al] of1 procuced Kk” 2

outsice the Soviet Bloc The Western Hemisphere consumes most

  

of its own preducticn, All but a small part of Middle Eest oil
is exported. In 1959, Middle East oil constituted 51 percent of
all Free World oil moving in international trace. Sixty-one
percent of Middle East exports went to Western Europe to supply
73 percent of that area's total needs. Most of the rest went
to Asia and the Far East where it filled 67 percent of that
ureats requirements. The 50,000 barrels a day (b/@) which
flowed to the Western Hemisphere represented only five percent

of that area's total consumptions?/

2. The Middle East's key role in world oil stems partly

from the richness of its petroleum resources, partly from the

 

Vv See Appendix I: "Free World Oil Procucticnad Reserves by
Areas and Countries, 1959s"

Tonnage per year may be calculated reuchly by multiplying
bfa by 506
-5-

5
Page-6
long-established pattern of efficient exploitation of these
resources, and partly from its central geogrephic location.
Miccle Esst reserves are tremencous, aimost 70 percent of the
Free World's provec total. Productivity is high and hence
costs are low, In 1959, of2 production in the Middle East
averaced hy 700 b/d per well, compared with 295 b/d in Venezuela,
ané 12 b/d in the US. Heavy investrent in pipelines and tankers
has produced a surplus of low cost carrying capacitye Concession
areas have generally been large; the terms of the concessions
have been similar; anc most of the concessions heve been in

the hands of companies owncd by several large American, British,
ane French firms.* The resulting efficiencies and economies,
plus the steacily inercasing eemané for oil, have provided both

the c:mpanies anc the host countrics with substantial profitse

To the Middle East

3. In an area whose other natural resources are slight, the
Gisecvery and exploitation cf petrcleum has had an enormeus

eecmmic, social, and ;olitical impact. To the oil-procucing

 

* Principal companies and their holcings are cutlined in
Appendices III and IVe

-6-

f
Page-7
countries the revenues from the production of oil are the key
economic reality. Oil is the one incicencus source which can
pay fcr the evelopment prosTrens y uy the arms, anc acquire the
myriad other technical woncers and luxuries of the twentieth
century. Oil revemcs comprise 95 percent of totel government
receipts in Kuwait, 80 percent in Sauci Arabia, 66 percent in
Iraq, and about So percent in Iran. Acditional benefits are
derivee from customs receipts on goocs imported with oil-

orisinated funds ane foreign exchanze obtained from local

 

expenditures by the cil companies. Of the trensit cruntriess
the UAR derives the most substantial benefits from tanker tolls
in the Suez Canal anc from pipclines crossing Syriae Lebanon

and Jorcan cet relatively small transit revenuesSe

he All of the producing countries in the Middle Eest are
heavily cependent on oil revenueSe They could, t a varying
degree, absorb a relatively small reduction in income. If they
were tc lose most or all of their oil revenuesy all would be
seriously affected; the impact would depend lercely on the

availability of siternate sources of revemuce

S. Deprived cf oil revenues, Sauci Arabia would face economic

ruin ond probably political chaos; the country has pudlt up ne

-T-

ft
Page-8
money reserves and it would be extremely difficult and probably
impossible for the government to remain effective for more than a
few months. Kuwait, possessor of the world's largest proven oil .
reserves, equal to those of the entire Western Hemisphere, is
totally a creation of the oil boom. The Ruler has invested large
sums in the UK and Kuwait could exist for a considerable time on
these investments if present revenues ceased. However, these in-

vestments would probably be blocked by the Eritish Government ii

 
 

the event of an ouster of the Kuwait Oil Compary. Even if the
funds remained unblocked, the development program would gradually
grind to a halt and business would begin to stagnate. Iran and
Iraq possess other sources of revenue, but would face serious eco-
nomic dislocation, as well as drastic reductions in their develop-
ment programs and general governmental activity if oil revenues were
to be shut off. In all these covntries, substantial and prolonged
deprivation of oil revenue, particularly if no resumption were in
sight, would, we believe, generate sufficient dislocation and un~
rest as to make the fall of their govermments likely. Ina similar
situation, the economy of the UAR would be affected seriously, al-

though probably not so much as to threaten political stability.

n
Page-9
fe

II. CHANGES IN THE WORLD OIL PICTURE

Devel nts in the Indust:

 

6. World consumption of ofl has increased greatly since
World War II. In Western Europe, requirements grew by about 13
percent annually between 1946 and 1959; for the Free World as a

whole the rise was over 7 percent annually. However, Free World

 
 

producing capacity has expanded even more rapidly, especially in ¢<7 >.

 

recent years. As a result, there is now a substantial excess of C

 

producing capacity over consumption. This situation is expected
to continue into the mid-1960's ond poseibly beyond. During this
period, Western European requirements will level off (to perhaps an
increase of 7 percent annually); total Free World demand will rise
somewhat less rapidly than in recent years; ond producing capacity
will continue to grow with the development of new sources of petro-
ileum in the ‘Middle East and elsewhere.* Major discoveries in
Algeria and Libya alone are expected to put 1,000,000 b/a on the
market by 1965. Soviet exports to the Free World will add to avail-

able supplies. Transportation, not long ago a limiting factor in the

 

* During this period, the consuming areas my begin to receive sup-
plies of natural gas from overseas sources as technological de-
velopments provide for new transportation facilities. Eventually
world energy supplies will be supplemented by a variety of new
sources: shale oil and tar sands, wind, solar, cellular, and
nuclear power.

-9-

t
Page-10
movement of oil, is more than adequate to meet anticipated demands
for the 1960's. Free World tanker surplus is substantial and Mid-

dle Eastern pipelines are even now not working at capacity. -

7. %In recent years o number of new companies have entered the
industry in North Africa and the Middle East. New sources of supply
have been discovered; and additional countries have become producers.

Any oil that is discovered by the newcomers will compete increasingly

2

with present Middle East production. In some eases, especially Le

Africa and Asia, there will be a temptation for the consuming are

ca

4

<e,
Ses

to forsake traditional suppliers in favor of a newcomer who can be
persuaded to give the consuming country markedly better terms or a
share in local refining and marketing operations. Finally, of

course, the more liberal terms the newcomers have offered the pro-
ducing countries are adding to the pressure on the existing pattern

of concessions.

8. The ofl industry will be increasingly affected by the in-
port policies of the consumer countries, Japan is already taking
weasures to ensure domestic markets for oil produced abroad by its
nationals, Italy will probably eventually do likewise. France has
already persuaded foreign-owned refining and marketing organizations

within its borders tc accept French-owned Algerian crude. As more

-10-
Page-11
r

and more Algerian crude becomes evailoble, Paris my revive its
now quiescent efforts to get Common Merket preference for it.

West Germany may also seek to ensure a place in its domestic mar-
ket for any crude that may be brought in by the West German con-
panies which are ncw participating in exploration abrucd. The US
has for some tine had iuport controls, though these ere designed to

encourage donestic production rather than protect local markets for
aN
2

    

oil produced abroad by US nationals.

 

9. Foreign exchange problems will also continue to affect the
oil industry to o considerable degree. The foreign exchange posi-
tions of the Western European importing countries have improved sub-
stantially in the past several years, ard the extent to which oil
must be paid for in dollors or other currencies is now a less in-
portant factor than fornerly. Nonetheless, nost governments are
still eager to husband their foreign exchange. Moreover, they will
take advantagé of offers by new producers selling crude at a sharp
discount and be tempted by deals involving soft currency, barter

exchanges, or government to government transactions.

10. There is little likelihood that the expanding market east
of Suez, will provide an outlet for much of the Middle East's sur-

plus producing capecity. Consumption in Asia and the Far East is

-ll-
Page-12
expected to increase at about seven percent during the next five
yeors; but in absolute terms, this means only an average of about
130,000 b/d annuslly. There is a chance that these increased re- .
quirenents will be partially covered by such developments as exe
pended production in Indonesia or new discoveries in india. More-
over Soviet oil can be expected to be sold in increasing quantities

in this area, as already evidenced by shipments to Japan and India.

s
E ‘

The Soviet Chollenge

Xe,

Neva
11. The USSR exported considerable anounts of petroleun be-
fore World Wer II(reaching a peak of about 120,000 b/d in 1932).
Exports ceased during the war, and the Soviet Bloc did not re-enter
the internotioncel oil market on a commercial scale until 1955.
Since then, Bloc exports, which are almost entirely of Soviet origin,
have increased rapidly, rising, for example, from about 230,000 v/a
in 1958 to 360,000 b/d in 1959.* This year, the Bloc is expected to

export about 450,000 b/a.

12. Soviet Bloc exports now go to at least 28 Free World

countries. The USSR has used its petroleum exports to obtain

 

* See Appendix II: "Estimated Soviet Bloc Oil Exports to the
Free World, 1959”

-le-
Page-13
capital equipnent in Western Europe and Japan. Where politically
expedient, as in India and Cuba, it has accepted paynert in soft

currencies or commodities. The private companies which control

Free World oil are especially ill-equipped to ecpe with the latte:

 

kind of competition. The Bloc has also supplied extensive tech-
nical services and equipment for exploration activities in the UAR,

Iraq, and India.

13. Soviet activities in international oil will elnost cer-
tainly expand further in the next few years. The current Sevens
Year Plan goal for petroleum production in the Soviet Union in 1965
is obout 4.8 million b/d, almost double 1959 production. This
quantity would provide the USSR with an exportable surplus of about
1 million b/a. About half of this is likely to be needed to meet
the requirenents of other Bloc states. Hence, the volume available
for exports to the Free World would be about 500,000 b/d, approxi-
mately the sane as in 1960.#

oe

¥ "Ril estinates of future Soviet exports to the Free World are ten-
tative because of the lack of reliable information on longer tern
Bloc production and requirenents, especially in regard to Conm-
nist China. The present figures are based on the assumption that
Cormunist China, which now produces about 104,000 b/a ana imports
about 80,000 b/d (alnost entirely fron the USSR), will in 1965
produce about 360,000 b/d and inport 100,000 v/a froa the USSR.
While the figures in paragraph 13 represent our best estimate at
this tine, they could be upset by a nunber of factors, notable
anong then a greater than anticipated increase in Eastern European
Satellite or Chinese Cormmnist requirenents or a less than exe
pected expansion of production in Conmunist Chinas

~13-

off
Page-14
14. However, recent infornation, supported by Soviet per-
formance during the past two years, indicates that -production in
1965 may exceed Plan goals and could run as high as 5.6 million
b/d. Of this, we estinate that as much as 1 million b/a would be
available for export to the Free Worla. Whether or not the USSR
will indeeé exceed its production goal for 1965 and thus have this
quantity of oil available for export, will, of course, depend on
its ability to develop refinery capacity, internal transport, and
tanker Lift, as well as to open new parkets for such oil. There is

evidence thet the Soviet Union has evbarked on a program to do s0-

15. We estimate that in 1965 Soviet oil will constitute about
seven percent of the totel international novenent into Free World
markets. We do not believe that this of itself will upset the
preponderant position of the Western companies in the international
trade nor destroy the present overall pattern of Middle East oil
industry. It will, however, erable the Soviet Union to conpete
actively in the Free World market to the Getrinent of Middle East
ofl and to upset markets in various individual consuning countries.
In sooll markets, the USSR could even displace Western oil con-
panies. Ina situation of contimuing worldwide surplus, a growing
influx of Soviet oil is likely also to spur further price cuts with

a consequent disrupting influence on relations between the Middle

-We-
Page-15
Eastern governments and the Western companies, Moreover, an ex-
panded progran of technical assistance for the developnent of new
producing and refining facilities will probably increase Soviet

leverage in various underdeveloped ccuntries. All this will ncke

the USSR a force to be reckoned with in the international petro-

 

leun field.

16. For the next few years at least, the USSR's use of its
influence for pclitical purposes will probably be limited to sone
degree by its desire to derive naxinun econonic benefits for itself
fron its oil exports, which are presently its largest single earner
of foreign exchange. It will also consider the possibility of
arousing hostile sentinent anong the Middle East countries if Soviet
oil appears to be usurping foreign markets from Middle East oil.
Even so, Soviet activities in this sensitive field will almost
certainly be directed to a considerable extent against Western in-
terests. In the oil-producing oreas, the USSR is likely to en-
covrage nationalist sentinent to nake increased demands on the
established companies. In the consuming areas it will seek in
various ways to impinge on Western markets and to promote its

own influence in the countries concerned.

-15-
Page-16
17, We believe that for some time to come the USSR will

neither wish nor be able to assume the political and economic

burdens that would be involved in taking over responsibility for OP?
>
(s y

the total oil industry in the area. However, in the event of &

oe
oe,

withdrawal or expulsion of Western oil interests from any one Sy uae

 

country, such as occurred in Iran under Mossadegh, the Soviet
Union probably could provide enough economic support of one kind
or another to prevent serious dislocations in the economy of the

affected country,

18. In terms of physical capability, the USSR will soon, if
it does not already, have sufficient transporting and marketing
facilities to move and sell most of the production of one or
more of the smaller Middle East producers, say Bahrein or Qatar.
By the end of the period of this estimate, it may even have de-
veloped sufficient facilities to transport and market most of the
o4l from one of the larger producers, e.g., Iran, Iraq, or Saudi
Arabia, We believe it unlikely, however, that the Soviet Union
actually will undertake to do either, British political influence
will probably continue to make the smaller producers in ascessible to
the USSR; and, except in unusually favorable circunstances, the

USSR is apt to be inhibited from assuming responsibility for

-16-

f=
Page-17
disposal of the oil of one of the major producers because of the

formidable political, economic, and technical problems involved,

as well as Western opposition.

 

III, MIDDLE EAST DEVELOPMENTS

National Aspirations

19. The prospects for a continuing world oil surplus have
introduced new problems into the relationship between the companies
and the oil-producing countries, The governments of the latter are
most immediately concerned with problems of revenue -- revenue to
add to the power and prestige of the ruling groups, and, in most
eases, to support economic development programs, In the past the
various producing countries have taken advantage of each others!
difficulties to increase their own oil profits. The Arab states
were happy to see their oil fill the gap created by Mossadegh's
shutdown of Iranian oil, Iran in turn profited when the flow of
Arab 011 was disrupted by the 1956-1957 Suez difficulties. More
recently, however, all of the producing states have seen further

inereases in their revenues threatened by two major reductions in

-17-
Page-18
*
the posted price of crude oil. They responded in Baghdad in
September 1960 by setting up with unusual speed and cooperation
an Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) whose -

demand for a voice in pricing was strongly supported by the

Beirut 011 Congress in October 1960.

 

20. For some years there have been other deep and troublesome
stirrings in the producing countries, These are based partly on
the concept that the oil beneath their territories is a national
patrimony which will not last forever and which is being exploited
by the Western oil companies under unjust errangements made when
the area and its rulers were under the political domination of the
West. Fron this concept the idea is derived that the national
sovereignty and national interests of the contracting states should
override the legal rights and commercial interests of the private
companies, These feelings are shared even by many members of con-
servative groups, and they are deeply and widely held among most
other politically conscious elements in the area, Out of them have

grown a number of demands aimed at increasing local control of oil

 

* In the Middle Fast, a producing state's revenue ie calculated on

the basis of posted prices, not actual selling prices.

-18-
Page-19
f

operations in addition to -- and sometimes even apart from —-
increasing local profits. In addition, local resentment is ine
creased by the rising conviction that ruling groups, such as that
in Saudi Arabia, are squandering the oil revenues without due

regard for the welfare of the people as a whole.

 

21, %In their mildest forms, the demands for change include
replacement of foreign staff of the oil companies with locals,
transfer of company headquarters to the producing country, supply
vy the companies of technical and welfare services only renotely
connected with the oil business, and more rapid relinquishment of
parts of the concession areas.” There will be increasing pressure
on the oil companies on all these issues everywhere in the area.
Most of the demands of this type are considered negotiable by the
companies, however, and it is uplikely that any widespread deadlock

will develop over them alone.

22. Amore important area of pressure during the next few
years will be the question of profit-sharing. Few producing
countries regard the 50/50 forma which is now standard in the

industry as equitable, In addition, these countries believe that

 

The concessions usually cover large areas and generally pro-—
vide for the gradual relinquishment of areas which the con-
eessionaire is not exploiting.

-19-

fF
Page-20
x
tyne

the - are constantly seeking to reduce the countries'

 

share through manipulation of prices and exorbitant claims for
amortization and expenses. Demands for upward revision of the

formula will, of course, be spurred by the fact that some of the

new companies are offering higher percentages of profits to the x %
host countries, , 3

23, Other aspirations pose an even more direct ehallenge
to the companies, Governments of some producing countries are
showing increasing interest in participation in ownership and
management of the producing companies. Apart from the additional
profits they would receive as stockholders, this would give them
a greater voice in such questions as how much oil should be pro-
duced and to whom it should be sold. It would also bring them in
closer touch with the industry as a whole and would, they hope,
enable them to influence international activities now beyond their
control, National participation is provided for in recent ventures
by Italian, American, and Canadian companies in Iran, and will
almost certain eventually appear as a demand in negotiations for

revision of older concessions.

24. The most ambitious of local aspirations, put forward

chiefly by Saudi Director of Petroleum Abdullah Tariki, demands

-20-

of
Page-21
that all operations from the producing well to the gasoline pump
be handled by integrated companies, in the management and profits
of which the host governments would have a share. This goes con-

siderably beyond the other schemes, since it would give the pro-

 

ducing governments a share in contz’0l over company facilities and
operations beyond their own borders. The threat of nationalization,
which the area governments have always seen as their weapon of last
resort in dealing with the companies, could then extend to the
whole integrated company and its facilities inside and outside the
producing country, The Japanese company, which was the first to
accept this principle in its concession for the offshore areas in
the Kuwait-Saudi Arabia Neutral Zone, has already struck oil in
promising quantities. If, as appears likely, the Japanese company
is able to operate successfully, the pressure for integration else-

where 1g likely to increase rapidly.

25. Recent developments have given new impetus to discussions
of cooperation between producing states. Arab oil experts have
long stressed the desirability of collaboration among themselves
and with non-Arab producers, such as Iran and Venezuela. An arab
tanker fleet and an Arab pipeline have been discussed, but no progress

has been made te translate these schemes into action. We do not

= 21 -

f/-
Page-22
fo
think that, for the next several years at least, any effective

joint action by the producing states is likely to take place --

chiefly because of mutual jealousy and suspicion and because of

competing economic interests. There is a possible exception to Kk Dp

 

individually, the producing states will probably work more ef-
fectively through OPEC to bring pres: re on the companies than they
have in the past. We doubt that they will be able to agree on a
workable program for prorating production, the only practical

way for them to control prices, but they are likely to succeed in

influencing the companies' policies to some degree.

Company Reactions

 

26, The attitudes, intentions, and capabilities of the big
international oil companies in regard to the pressures against them
are not easy to assess. The position of the companies is strong
in many ways, They have developed and control the vast and complex
apparatus in Western Europe, Africa, Asia, and America through which
Middle East oil is actually marketed. This apparatus is beyond the
physical control of the producing countries. They cannot tax it,

nationalize it, or shut it down, The companies alone have the

- 22 -

f
Page-23
enormous capital and technical ability required for the heavy
development and research activities required in every phase of
the oil industry. The negotiating positions of most of the

European companies are strengthened hy the fact of their govern-

ment's participation in their ownership and by the importance

 

which their governments place on continued access to Middle Fast
*

oil, In addition, the companies. can exert great influence --

especially in a surplus market -- by adjusting their off-takes

from the various producing countries.

27. At the same time, the companies labor under major dis—
advantages. However benign or constructive their policies may be,
they are inextricably linked in the Middle Eastern mind with
Western imperialism and are subject to political as well as economic
pressures, So strongis the bias against the companies that some
local elements are likely even to be susceptible to Communist

arguments that Soviet activities in the international oil field

 

* this is especially true of the British Petroleum Company, in which

the UK Government has majority ownership and which in turn holds
major interests in Kuwait Oil Co., Iraq Petroleum Co., and the
Iranian Consortium. While the UK is less dependent financially

on Middle East oil now than some years ago, oil revenues are still
valuable economically and access to Middle East oil remains impor-
tant strategically. With the coming into production of the Algerian
fields, French reliance on Middle East oil is declining.

-23-
Page-24
(which will almost inevitably be detrimental to Middle Eastern
producers) are to be welcomed because they will help break the

power of the Western monopolies. Even well-informed local officials-

  

and political leaders fail to appreciate the intricacy and com-
plexity of the oil industry and underrate the difficulties which”
they would encounter in trying to run an international 011 business.
Finally, of course, the international oil industry is a highly
competitive one, and there is a limit to how far the companies can

or will go in preserving a common front.

28. There is talk among company executives, and some evidence
in company activities, of a new "tough" line toward local demands.
The Trans Arabian Pipeline™ (TAPLINE) appears prepared to close down
rather then yield to demands for higher transit fees. The Iraq
Petroleum Company temporarily reduced its off-take from Basra be-
cause of a heavy new port tax imposed there by the Iraqi Government.
The established companies have rejected requests from the producing
countries for a voice in pricing, and refuse to consider integration.
They view the 50/50 profit-sharing formula as a benchuark of stability
and insist that breaching it would lead to a continuous spiral of

governmental demands. However, the history of negotiations in the

 

* PAPLINE's ownership is identical with that of the Arabian American
042 Company (ARANCO),

~ 2h -

T
Page-25
ft:

Middle East shows that the coupanies have time and again given in
to or compromised substantisily with demands which they first re-

jected as completely unacceptable.

Iv. THE OUTLOOK

 

29. A highly important factor in the world oil picture for
the next several years will be the continuing surplus of producing
(and, secondarily, transporting) capacity. Because of the numerous
uncertainties involved, political as well as economic and technical,
it is difficult to determine precisely how this surplus will affect
the Middle Fast. One thing is clear, The great reserves which the
area possesses will contimue to make it a major factor in world
oil, Its exports to Western Europe will almost certainly continue
to increase gradually in absolute terms as Western European con-
sumption expands, However, with North African and Soviet oil
playing a larger role in the international oil trade, its share of
the Western European market is expected to decrease from 73 percent

of the total in 1959 to an estimated 59 percent in 1965.

30. While Middle Fast production is likely to continue to
rise slowly for at least the next five years, the rate of increase

will be slower, and the halcyon days of spectacular annual increases

-25-

f*
Page-26
in revenue are probably over for the Middle Eastern countries.
Revenues are apt to grow only modestly and new rounds of price
cuts -- which are by no means unlikely — could even lead to some
dininution in the present level of revenue, Barring such unlikely
contingencies as widespread shutdowns or large-scale destruction
of oil producing and transporting facilities, however, we believe
the odds are against major decreases in the present levels of
revenue — chiefly because Western governments, the oil companies,
and most influential elements in the producing countries are well

aware of the disastrous consequences.

31. Pressures from the producing governments on the companies
will grow heavier, and major changes in the present concession
pattern are likely, The 50/50 profit-sharing forma will probably
give way in the next five years -- both because there may be no
other way to keep revenues up and because the formula has already
been breached in Venezuela, Iran, and the Kuwait-Saudi Arabia Neutral
Zone, The companies are also likely to permit over a period of time
a larger participation of the local government in management of pro-
ducing companies. They will resist vigorously the demand for in-
tegrated companies, chiefly because most of the present producing

companies are merely instrumentalities of the parent companies set

-26-

f
Page-27
6

up for the purposes of exploration and exploitation, For them

to engage in marketing would place them in direct competition with
the present parents. Even here, however, it is possible that
eventually new limited regional refining, transporting, and mar=

keting organizations including local interests may emerge.

32, We do not believe that large-scale nationalization of
existing o11 company facilities is likely during the period of this
estimate, although threats of such action will probably be used fron
time to time for purposes of pressure. The governments of the pro-
ducing countries remember the experience of Mossadegh in Iran, and

they are unlikely to enulate him unless they become extrenely

 

aroused emotionally or come to believe that their loss of revenue
would be made up by the Soviet Bloc. However, there may develop
a kind of "creeping" nationalization under which the companies
gradually retreat to a position where they are little more than
managing agents of the local governments. We think the odds are

against even this going very far in the next few years.

33, In the past the situation usually stabilized for some
time once a new pattern in government-company relationships was
established. This may happen again on & basis of greater govern-

ment profits and more government participation in control. However,

-27-

f
Page-28
LA

these periods of quiescence, if they come at all, are likely to

be briefer and briefer, At some time, the companies may come to -
feel that the oil business in the Middle East has become so hazard-
ridden and profits so marginal that they may as well liquidate their
interests there and concentrate elsewhere. We believe that time

is beyond the period of this estimate.

34+ On balance, we think the odds are against any development
in regard to Middle East oil critically detrimental to US national
interests in the next few years. Actual physical seizure of the

area by the USSR is unlikely short of a general war. Soviet

 

mischief-making will continue and could become dangerous in specific
cases, e€.g., a Cormunist-exploited upheaval in Iran followed by
abrogation of the consortium agreement, However, even a Communist
takeover in one of the producing countries would not necessarily

result in a refusal to sell the country's o4l to the West.

35. Under these circumstances, Western Furope will probably
continue to get as much of] as it needs from the Middle East while
developing alternate sources west of Suez. The Middle Eastern
countries are likely to continue to get enough revenue to support

substantial development programs. Temporary shutdowns of individual

- 28 -

r
Page-29
sources of oil may occur as a result of deadlocks in negotiations,
or more likely, political upheavals, Transit facilities may also
be blocked, especially in the event of another outbreak of the
Arab-Israeli conflict; but we believe a lasting areawide break-
down in the Middle East oil situation is unlikely, at least for the
period of this estimate. Nevertheless, the balance of interest
between the desirability of developing alternate sources of oil to
meet Western Europe's needs and the importance of assuring Middle
Eastern countries of sufficient oil revenues to avoid instability

will continue to pose problems for US policy.

iy

36, Other problems may emerge from possible conflicts of Er
interest or objectives between the US and its Western allies,
especially the UK and France. The UK has in the past considered
it essential both strategically and economically to retain a
measure of political control over the oil-producing areas. We
believe the British now regard this policy as outmoded in large
measure, but it will remain possible that in a crisis situation,
they might feel compelled to exert physical control over Kuwait.
France may come to feel that increasing availability of oil from
Algeria enables it to take a harder line with the Arab states, who
are generally hostile to French interests as a result of France's

support of Israel and suppression of the Algerian rebels.

-~2-

ff
Page-30
yw

37, Another set of problems derived from the difficulty of
determining in particular circumstances whether and how US strategic
and commercial interests coincide or conflict. For example, the .
question of US import restrictions will almost certainly come up
again during the period of this estimate, facing the policy maker
with the necessity of weighing the relative importance of promoting
a vigorous US domestic petroleum production against the advantages
to be derived in the Middle East through increased US imports from
that area, likewise, there will be questions involving the desires
of certain allied nations, e.g., Japan and Italy, to adopt import

policies designed to give preference to 011 from producing companies <*

=
W

run by their own nationals to the detriment of the British and

   

American companies and to the general principles of reciprocal trade.

38. Over the longer term, even broader problems of this nature
are likely to emerge, It is quite possible that sufficient supplies
for Western Europe and sufficient revenues for the Middle East coule
be achieved under arrangements where the present concessionary
interests of the international oil companies in the area are elimi-
nated and Western companies act at most only as agents of the pro-
ducing countries. Sueh a development would probably reduce the

political problems which now confront the West and its relations

- 30-

fx
Page-31
A

with the producing countries — some of which stem from the close
association in the Middle Eastern mind of the companies with

Western governments. .

39, Nevertheless, a surrender or large-scale withdrawal of
Western company interests under pressure would initially at least
be regarded as a setback for Western prestige. Liquidation of the
role traditionally played by the Western companies -- even if they
were subsequently replaced by other arrangements -- would almost
certainly result in some dislocation in the oil picture which would
lend itself to Soviet exploitation. Economic factors of major
interest to the US would also be involved, e.g., the loss of mech
of the substantial increment to the balance of payments which the

Western oil companies now earn through their operations in the area.

7

2
s
z

 

 

Se,

-jl-
Page-32
UNCLASSIFIED

APPENDIX I

FREE WORLD CRUE (IL PRODUCTION ANT RESERVES
BY AREAS AND COUNTIZES, 1959

 

 

 

 

 

 

(in barrels)
Production Percentage of Free Estiroted Percentages
Areo B/n* World Production Proved Reserves of Reserves
KIBDLE FAST
Rahroin 45,000 0.3 225,000,000 C1
Egypt 57,000 0.3 500, C00 ,000 0.2
Iran , 928,000 5.6—S 35,000,000, 000 13.3-3
Iraq 852,000 5.1 —6 254060,000 C00 95-5
Israel 2,000 insig 10, CLO, C00 insi
Kuwoit 2,385,000 “re-3 62,000,000 ,C00 B36 -l
Neutval Zone 136,000 0.7 6, 500,000,000 2.5
Qatar 169,000 1.2 2,500,000 000 1.0
Soudi Arobia —1, 094,000 6.6 - ¥ 50,000,000,000 19.0 —2
Other none 0 101,000,000 0.1
Subtotal 4,648,000 28.0 181, 866,000,000 69.3
WESTERN HEMISPHERE
United States 7,054,000 42.3 —1 33, 5G0,000,CO0O 2.7 —4+
Venezuela 2,771,000 16.7 —B 3B,000,000,000 6.8 —G
Canada 503,000 3.0 4,590,000 ,000 1.7
Other 795,000 4.8 6,436,000,C00 24
Subtotal 11,123,000 66.8 62,526,000,000 23.6 @
ee
ASIA AND FAR EAST
Indonesia 381,000 2.3 9,000,000 ,000 3.4
British Borneo 112,000 0.7 500,000, C00 0.2
Other 45,000 0.3 746 ,000 ,000 0.3
Subtotal 538,000 3.3 10, 246,000,000 3.9
NORTH AFRICA
Algeria 28,000 0.2 5,000,000,000 a2
Libya none 0 1, 500,000,000 0.
Other 2,000 insig 9,000,000 insig
Subtotal 30,000 0.2 6, 509,000,000 2.5
WEST AFRICA 24,000 0.1 265,000,000 0.1
EUROPE 262,000 1.6 1,496,000,000 0.6
TOTAL, FREE 26,625,000 100.0 262,908,000,000 100.0
(See next page)
- 32-

UNCLASSIFIED
Page-33
UNCLASSIFIED

Note and footnote for Appendix I

NOTE; Sino-Soviet Bloc production in 1959 was about 2.9 nillion
of which the USSR provided about 2.6 million b/d or

b/d
15.4 percent of total Free Worid production. No figures -
are available for Soviet reserves.

 

* p/a: barrels per day. The US barrel has 0 volune of 42 US
gallons.

 

- 33 -

UNCIASSIFIEN
Page-34
AFPENDIX IT

ESTIMATED SOVIET BLOC OIL EXPORTS TO FREE WORLD, 1959

   

(Barrels)
Europe
Austria 5,796,000
Belgiun®™ 4,526,000
Denmark 613,000
Finland 13,440,000
France 6,928,000
Gerrany (West) 13,739,000
Greece 4,081,000
Iceland 2,570,000
Italy 23,710,000
Netherlands” 9,818,000
Norway 2,394,000
Sweden 10,694 ,000
Switzerland 650,000
United Kingdon 825,000
Yugoslavia 2, 942.000
East
Algeria 186,000
Lebanon 431,000
Morocco 469,000
Tunisia 100,000
UAR 19,150,000
Latin Arerica
Argentina 3,526,000
Brazil 431,000
Uruguay 3,672,000
Others
Afghanistan 307,000
Japan 1,600,000
TOTAL 131,998,000
(362,000 b/d)
{footnote on next page)
- 3h

uf
Page-35
ft

Footnote to Appendix IT

*

Figures for Belgium and the Netherlands include petroleum
imported for transshipment to other Free World countries.
Actual imports for domestic consumption were:

Belgiun: 3,623,000
Netherlands: 519,000

-35-
Page-36
APPENDIX XII

INTERNATIONAL PETROLEUM COMPANIES WITH
SHAREHOLDINGS IN THE MIDDLE FAST

NOTE: Virtually all petroleum concessions ore held by
"producing conpanies," e.g., the Arabian Anerican Oil Con-
pany, Kuwoit il Company. ‘These "producing companies” are
owned by combinations of large international oil companies,
generally referred to as "parent companies.” Oil is
extracted by the "producing companies" and scld to the parents
which in turn transport, refine and market it. This appendix
lists the nost important of these companies. Appendix IV
shows ownership of the principal producing companies.

 

MAJOR CCMPANIES SMALLER COMPANIES NEWCOMERS
US Controlled US Controliec US Controlled
Standard 011 Co. Anerican =ndependent Standard @il
(New Jersey) Oil Co. Co. (Indiana)
Socony Mobil 012 Co. Getty il Co.
Gulf Oil Corp. Richfield 6i1 Corp.
Standard Oi1 Co. Cities Service Co.
(Califcrnia)
The Texas Co.
European Controlled Other
sumopeon Controlled Other
Royal Sutch/Shell Group Ente Nozionnle
British Petroleun Co. Ltd. T drocarburi
Cie. Francoise des Petroles (Italian)

Japan Petroleun
Trading Co. Ltd.

- 36 -
Page-37
MAJOR

a@. Standard Oil Company (New Jersey)

 

4. 30 percent in Arabian American Oil Company (ARAMCO)e

ii. 11.872 percent in Iraq Fetroleum Company Ltd. (IPC)
and its associated companies in Iraq, Qatar, Trucial
Coast and Omane

444. 7 percent in Iranian 011 Participants Ltce

This is the world's largest oil company with producing prop=
erties, refineries, and marketing outlets throughout the world.
Its interests include concessions in Libya where it has had

major disccveries anc in Algeria.

be Socony Mobil Oil Company
i. 10 percent in Arabian American Oil Companye

ii. 12.873 percent in Iraq Petroleum Company Ltd., and

 

its associated companiese

iii. 7 percent in Iranian Oil Participants Ltd.

Another major international oil company cperating in all
branches of the petroleum industry throughout the world. Its
interests include concessions in Libya where it has had a number

of discoveries and in Algeriae

-3T-
Page-38
ee Guif 011 Corporation
is 50 percent in Kuwait O11 Company Ltd.
ii. 7 percent in Iranian 01] Participants Ltd,

This company also cperates on a worldwide besis, It holds

concessicns in Libya where it has had a number of Giscoveries.

a. Standard 012 Company of Califcrnia
i. 30 percent in Arabian American Oil Company
ii. 7 percent in Iranian Oil Participants Ltd,

idi.s 50 percent in Bahrain Petroleum Co. Ltds

This is another fully integrated internaticnal oil companys
In the Eestern Hemisphere it operates through the California Texas
Corporation (Caltex) » in which it has a joint interest with the
Texas Company. Its holdings incluce concessions in Libya, where

it has had a number of discoveries, and in Algeria.
€e Texaco

This leading internaticnal o12 company hes shareholdings
in the Eastern Hemisphere separate from, but identical to,

those of Standard 0il Company of California.

0
Page-39
¢

f. Royal Dutch/Shell Group
4. 23.75 percent in Iraq Petroleum Company Ltd. and
its associated companies.
iis 14 percent in Iranian 0i1 Participants Ltd.
iiie 100 percent in concession covering offshcre areas

of Qatar.

This aggregation of British and Dutch-owned companies is
one of the world's major producers, refiners, and marketers of
petroleum, with extensive holcings in Venezuela, Indonesia, and
the US. It holds interests in concessions in Algeria jointly
with French firms on some of which major discoveries have been
mace. Concessions are also held in Libya where it has experienced

some successese

€ British Petroleum Company Ltd.
i. 4O percent in Iranian Oil Participants Ltde

 

di. 23.75 percent in Iraq Petroleum Company Ltd. and
its associated companicse
44i. 50 percent in Kuwait Oil Company Ltd.
iv. 66 2/3 in Abu Dhabi Marine Areas Ltde and Dubai
Marine Areas Ltde both of which hold offshore

concessions in the Trucial Coaste
Page-40
of

This company, with majority UK government ownership, is
another of the world's major petroleum producers and cistributorse
Reserves are mainly in the Middle Ecst and refining and marketing

dargely in Europe. It holds concessions in Algeria and Libyae

he Cite. Francaise ces Fetroles
4. 23.75 percent in Iraq Petroleum Company Ltd. and
its associated companies.
ai. 6 percent in Iranian 011 Farticipants Ltde
didi, 33 1/3 percent in Abu Dhabi Marine Areas Ltds and
Dubai Marine Areas Ltds both of which held offshore

ecnoeseions in the Trucial Cozste

This company, in which the French Government has a larze
minority stock interest, operates mainly in the Miccle East, North
Africa and Eurcpe.e Its holdings include a 50 percent interest in a

Algeria's most important of] field, Hassi Messaoud.

 

SMALLER

4. American Independent Oi) Company (AMINOIL)

 

i. 100 percent in concession granted by the Shaikh of
Kuwait covering his undivided half interest in Kuwait-

Sauci Arabia Neutral Zone onshore areae

-ho -

f
Page-41
di. 0.832 percent in Iranian 0i1 Participants Ltd.

This company wes sct up by a number of smaller US oil
companies and individuals to engage in petroleum exploration

and development abroad and to transport oile

je Getty 012 Company
4. 100 percent in the concession granted by the King of
Saudi Arabia covering his undiviced half interest in
the Kuwait-Sauci Arabia Neutral Zone onshore areae

44. 0.417 percent in Iranian Oil Participants Ltd.

Getty 021 Company and AMINOIL operate jointly in the Neutral
Zonee Getty has adciticnal small interests in Iran through its

part ownership of Ticewater Oil Company.

k. Richfield Oil Corporation
4. 50 percent working interest in concessicn held by
Dhofar-Cities Service Corporation covering the Dhofar
Province of Muscat and Oman.
ii. 1.250 percent in Iranien Oil Participants Ltd.

ido Cities Service Company
This company's wholly-owned subsidiary, Dhofer-Cities Service

Corporation has 50 percent interest in concession covering the

-hi-

f=

“ae Ub;

é
(s
Page-42
Dhofar Province of Muscat and Oman, Cities Service Company also

holds concessions in Algeriae
NEWCOMERS

m. Standard Oil Company of Indiana
This large, intesreted company operates mainly in the US.
Its foreign interests include offshore concessions in Iran and

concessicns in Algeria and Libya.

ne Ente Nazionale Icrocarburi (ENI)

This company, eontrolled by the Italian Government, has a
50 percent interest with National Iranian 011 Company (Iranian
Government-ownec) in certain offshore and onshore ecncessions
in Iran, It also has interests in Egypt and concessions in
Libya and other North African countries. It is an important
supplier of petroleum in Italy where it has a monepoly over

natural gas production and ccntrols some petroleum refinerirse

Oe Japan Petroleum Tracing Co, Ltd.
This Japanese company, cpcratin. thrcugh ite subsidiary, the

Arabian O11 Company, holds two concessions, covering the Kuwait-
Sauci Arabia Neutral Zone offshore area, from the Shaikh of
Kuwait and the King of Saudi Arabia for their respective undivided

half interestse

-hoe

of
Page-43
iil.

Gf

APPENDIX IV

OWNERSHIP OF PRINCIPAL MINDLE EAST PRODUCING CCMPANIES

IRANIAN OIL CONSORTIUM

British Petroleum Co. 404%
Royal Dutch-Shell he
Standard O11 (New Jersey) th
Standard Oil (California) 1h
TRAQ PEFROLEUM CO.
British Petroleun Co. 23.75%
Royal Dutch Shell 23.756
Standard 0i1 (N.J.)

and Socony Mobil 23-756
KUWAIT OIL CO.
Gulf 011 Company 50%
British Petroleun Co. Ltd. 50%
ARABIAN AMERICAN OIL CO.
Stendard Oil Co.

(New Jersey) 30%
Standard Oil Co. of

California 30%
Texaco 30%
Socony Mobil O11 Co. 10%

-43 -

Gulf Oil Co. th
Texaco 1h
Socony Mobil Co. 1%
Cie. Francaise des

Petroles 6%

Sralier US Companies 5%

Cie. Francoise des

Fetroles 23.756
Gulbenkian Interests 5h

saw UR
'
Y

Laine

M0513 &