
Page-1
s ET

CONTROLLEDRQISSEM SNIE 97-69

6 March 1969

 

    
 
 

TE ‘This estimate was approved by the United States’ ~
“5. Intelligénice Boakd on 6 March 1969. The’printed
copies will be disseminated in a few days.

   

‘APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: FEB 2001
Page-2
CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM ..ceseccerecccccccncccsccccccccccsasecscsececes

CONCLUSIONS ..ccccsecees

 

 

Oe ecvcccncccccce

 

DISCUSSION .sscccccccccecncccccsoccccsccccecccccensoseseces

I.

THE MILITARY COUP AND THE IPC cececssccccccccccosevonse

Background seescccccccecccccvccece
Elements of Friction With the US .

 

eoceee

 

THE MILITARY REGIME: GOALS, INFLUENCES, AND POLITICAL

CONFLICTS cesccsccccceccccssccccccescanccssscnccccsvens

THE ECONOMIC REALITIES .escsevcee

 

eecercccce

 

US SANCTIONS AND PERUVIAN REACTIONS .sccoscccccvecceore
OUTLOCK ..ccccccccccrcccccccscccsccsccccssevcessvecsces

LATIN AMERICAN REACTIONS secccecccccecscsvccssccccccece

S-E- E-T

E

Ar Ff F&F

11

17
19
23
Page-3
oP

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
6 March 1969

SUBJECT: SNIB 97-69: PERU AND THE US: THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE
IPC CONTROVERSY

THE FROBLEM

To assess the consequences of the controversy over the
property of the International Petroleum Company (Iec) with
respect to the prospects for Peru under the military regime,
its relations with the US, and the implications of developments

in Peru for US relations in Latin America generally.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Because the issue is now caught up in highly emotional
nationalism, the military regime in Peru will almost certainly
not meet the requirements of US law for compensation of the IPC

for its expropriated assets. Thus, if all the forces now in train

GROUP 1
from automatic
Page-4
me

continue, the crisis with Peru over the IPC will be a major one --

perhaps disastrous for Peru and for US-Peruvian relations.

B. Although the initial economic impact of the Hickenlooper
and Sugar Act amendments by themselves would not be severe, a
sharp reduction of international lending and private investment --
either directly or indirectly because of US action -- would have
profound consequences for Peru. Over the long run Peru would at
best face severe economic strains, At worst, the hardships
occasioned by US sanctions could lead the military government

into drastic improvisations,

C. The application of US legislation even in the minimm
way required would provoke sharply anti-US sentiments throughout
the Peruvian Government and society. This would be especially
true if President Velasco remains in office (as we believe likely).
if sanctions went beyond what the amendments require, US-Peruvian
relations would deteriorate drastically. Under Velasco, Peruvian
reactions might come to include expropriation of other US businesses

and even a break in diplomatic relations.

D. President Velasco's personal entourage, apart from those

in the cabinet who support him, is composed of men whose political
Page-5
PPE

continue, the crisis with Peru over the IPC will be a major one --

perhaps disastrous for Peru and for US-Peruvian relations.

B. Although the initial economic impact of the Hickenlooper
and Sugar Act amendments by themselves would not be severe, a
sharp reduction of international lending and private investment --
either directly or indirectly because of US action -- would have
profound consequences for Peru. Over the long run Peru would at
best face severe economic strains, At worst, the hardships
occasioned by US sanctions could lead the military government

into drastic improvisations.

C. The application of US legislation even in the minimm
way required would provoke sharply anti-US sentiments throughout
the Peruvian Government and society. This would be especially
true if President Velasco remains in office (as we believe likely).
If sanctions went beyond what the amendments require, US-Peruvian
relations would deteriorate drastically. Under Velasco, Peruvian
reactions might come to include expropriation of other US businesses

and even a break in diplomatic relations.

D. President Velasco's personal entourage, apart from those

in the cabinet who support him, is composed of men whose political
Page-6
views cover the spectrum from extreme right to extreme left. All
appear to be ultranationalistic and anti-American. We have no evi-
dence to indicate that the advisers on the political left have
influence on Velasco which is different from or greater than that

of the other ultranationalists.

E. If President Velasco should be removed from office by a
group of relatively moderate generals, either before or after US
sanctions were invoked, actions against the US would probably be
less extreme; they wight be confined to such comparatively short-
term reprisals as preventing the remittance of profits by US com-
panies. But no one could hold office in Peru's present and
prospective climate who appeared to give way on the IPC issue or

failed to assert strong independence of US influence.

F. Peru's recent moves to establish diplomatic and economic
relations with the USSR and other European Communist countries,
which were begun last year under President Belatnde, probably are
more a show of independence from the US (and an effort to expand
markets) than a serious intention to develop a firm and close
relationship. We doubt that either side will be anxious to move
rapidly in that direction, though Peru may entertain hopes (in our

view unrealistic) of important economic benefits.
Page-7
G. In Letin America the public reaction to US actions will
be generally acrimonious, and will tend to harden Peru’s convic-
tion that its cause is just. The danger is not so much that
other governments will officially join with Peru in condemming US
policy, by such means as votes in the Organization of American
States, as that they will be stimulated to a general sharpening
of resentments they already feel, especially in the sphere of
economic relationships. Over time, a number of countries will
probably try harder to broaden their foreign economic and cultural
relations as a protection against dependence upon the US -- and
they may care much less about how the US views the propriety of

these new relationships.

DISCUSSION

I, THE MILITARY COUP AND THE IPC

Background

1. In October 1968, the military establishment in Peru threw
out the government of President Fernando Belaunde Terry, whose

election it had supported in 1963. The military leaders deplored

-4he

ee
Page-8
ees!
the chaotic state of civilian politics and were concerned about
growing economic strains. Moreover, they feared that the political

and economic malaise would favor the election to the presidency

,
in 1969 of their archenemy, Victor Raul Haya de la Torre.

2. A military coup had been undertaken in 1962 to forestall
Hayats election; the ruling junta at that time acted only as a
short-term caretaker -- until a coalition of political parties
strong enough to elect Belatnde could be formed. By the time of
the 1968 coup, however, the military leaders were convinced that
constructive representative government was beyond Peru's ken.
They have made it clear that they intend to retain direct control
of the government for a long time, in order, they say, to right
the centuries-old wrongs in Peru's political, economic, and social

structure.

3. To create immediate popular support for their regime,
they seized upon the most nationalistic issue available as a
justification for the coup: condemnation of Belatinde's terms of
settlement of a longstanding dispute with the US-owned IPC, which
"were widely regarded in Peru as being too favorable to the company.
They then proceeded to expropriate a major part of IFC's assets.

The ramifications of this action now threaten not only to strain
Page-9
gravely Peru's relations with the US, but also to compound the
difficulty of the tasks the regime has set for itself within Peru.
These developments in turn could focus the attention of other
latin American governments upon their own growing objections to a

variety of US policies.
Elements of Friction With the US

4, The expropriation took place against a background of
long-smouldering general resentment toward the US on the IPC and
other issues -- resentment stemming in large part from Peru's
heavy economic dependence on the US. US firms dominate many of
the country's export industries (especially mineral exports) and
have been increasing their influence in the domestic economy as
well, For several years the US has purchased more than 40 percent

of Peru's exports and furnished nearly 40 percent of Peru's imports.

5 In addition to the direct effects of its official loans
and aid, the overall impact of the US upon the Peruvian economy
is significantly increased because Peru receives large amounts

of capital from private and international lending agencies with
Page-10
ane

which the US has great int uence .2/ Beneficial though this rela-
tionship has been, it has cansed a Peruvian ambivalence between
gratitude on the one hand and the resentment of debtors toward

their creditors on the other. Thus, Peruvian nationalists have
claimed not only that the US and US business exploit Peru's re-
sources, but also that the US has not been sufficiently generous

with its aid to Peru.

6. For most Peruvians -- especially the military -- apparent
or real challenges to national sovereignty take on grave importance.
Thus, in addition to their general feeling of subordination to a
superpower, Peruvian military leaders have more specific grounds
for their attitude. The members of the military junta in 1962
believed that their coup was in the best interests of both Peru
and the US, since in their view the election of Haya would also
have threatened the goals of the Alliance for Progress. They were
shocked when the US suspended diplomatic relations and aid pro-

grams until they promised to hold elections. Then in 1967, after

y From 1961-1968 the US authorized for Peru some $350 million in

economic assistance and about $85 million in military aid. Of
this, some $240 million was grant assistance, and about $195
million was in the form of loans. Peru also benefits from its
US sugar quota. In 1968, the value of its sugar exports to the
US was some $59 million, of which about $44 million represented
the premium price paid by the US. In addition, Peru has since
1961 received some $250 million in credit authorizations from
international lending agencies in which the US has influence.

-7-

an
Page-11
the US had balked at selling F-5 fighter aircraft to Peru, the
Peruvian military decided to purchase jet aircraft from France --
only to see the US try to prevent the transaction. Because the
passage by the US Congress of the Conte-Long and Symington amend-
ments to the US foreign aid bill coincided with Peru's purchase

of the jets, Peruvians of all persuasions have felt that their
country's action was the specific occasion for the US legislation.2/

7. Although the US tempered its reaction to the coup of 1968,
the members of the current junta evidently expected their acces-
sion to power to cause difficulties in Peruvian-US relations.
Their belief was hardened by warnings that US legislation will
require suspension of aid to Peru and a cancellation of Peru's
sugar quota unless appropriate steps are taken within six months
toward compensation for the expropriated IPC property. In the
case of US aid the six months will expire on 4 April; in the case

 

2/ The amendments direct the President of the US to withhold
economic aid from countries in an amount equivalent to the
amount spent by them for “sophisticated weapons systems";
to terminate economic aid to countries if they divert US aid
or am unnecessarily large portion of their own resources to
military expenditures; and to use the US voting power in the
Inter-American Development Bank to disapprove any loan from
the Bank's Fund for Special Operations which might assist in
the acquisition of "sophisticated or heavy" military equipment.
Page-12
a

of the sugar quota, on 9 apri1.3/ Nevertheless, some of the members
of the regime apparently refuse to believe that the US President
is required by law to proceed in this matter without the traditional

flexibility of diplomacy.

8. Under the leadership of President Juan Velasco Alvarado,
the now retired general who led the October coup, the military
regime has responded to preliminary US pressure with an increas-
ingly inflexible position on the matter of compensation to IPC
for its expropriated property. Velasco has declared that the
matter will be decided in Peru's courts --~ where it is highly
unlikely that the IPC could win a satisfactory decision. As it
to foreclose negotiations, the regime has asserted the existence

of a debt owed by IPC to Peru of some $690 million (accumlated

 

zy Under the Hickenlooper amendment to US foreign aid legislation,
US economic aid is to be suspended when a recipient country
nationalizes the property of a US-owned firm, or “has taken
steps to repudiate or nullify existing contracts or agreements oF
and fails within six months to "take appropriate steps » which
way include arbitration, to discharge its obligations under
international law toward such... entity, including speedy
compensation for such property in convertible foreign exchange,
equivalent to the full value thereof... ." The date from
which this grace period runs is 4 October 1968, when Peru
nullified the August agreements between the Belavinde government
and the IPC. In addition, the US Sugar Act of 1948 (as amended)
provides for the cancellation of a country's sugar quota in
circumstances similar to those described in the Hickenlooper
amendment. The date from which this grace period runs is
9 October, when Peru seized IPCs Talara refinery.
Page-13
oe

since 1924), which IPC denies in its entirety, What is more, a
recent decree apparently requires IPC to deposit the $690 million
with the government before the courts will hear either its claims
for title to subsurface mineral rights or its counterarguments to
the allegation of debt. Finally, since the government has moved
against IPC's remaining assets -- including its distribution system
for refined products -- the chance that any way will be found to
meet the requirements of US legislation is diminished still further.

9- Now still another Peruvian grievance against the US has
intruded itself into the already troubled relationship. On
14 February 1969, a Peruvian gunboat fired on one US fishing ves-
sel and forced another to land and pay a fine for unlicensed
fishing within the 200-mile territorial waters which Peru has
claimed since row! Peruvians maintain that by not recognizing
this claim the US encourages its fishing boats to infringe upon
Peru's control of one of its major resources, even though the US
boats fish for tuna while the Peruvian fishing and fishmeal indus-

tries are based so far on the anchovy. The US Congress has

y Six other countries claim as much, at least for fishing rights.

They are Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Nicaragua, ard
Panama. Costa Rica claims special competence over living re-
sources to 200 miles. And three others are considering the
assertion of some kind of 200-mile claim: Brazil, Colombia,

and Uruguay.

- 10-

oN
Page-14
established penalties to be imposed against countries which interfere
with US fishing vessels operating outside a 12-mile fishing limit;
these include suspension of military sales and the recall of ships
On loan. The existence of these penalties, and the fact that US
boats have continued to fish within 200 miles, have added to the
regime's hostility toward the US. The recent challenge by the
Peruvian gunboat was the most vigorous to date. Although the

regime has played down the incident, the issue of fishing rights

is likely to flare again.

II, THE MILITARY REGIME: GOALS, INFLUENCES, AND POLITICAL
CONFLICTS
10. The Peruvian Government is currently made up of the
President, selected by a junta composed of the commanders of the
armed forces, and a cabinet made up of generals and admirals.
This group, and the entire officer corps, are united at minimum
by strong feelings about morality in government and national inde-
pendence, so important in the rationale for their coup. So far
they have had strong public support -- based especially on their
nationalistic posture toward IPC. A large portion of the population
accepted the military takeover on the grounds that strong leader-
ship was necessary to rectify the damage done to Peru by the corrup-

tion and chaos of the deposed civilian government. In fact » even

-ll -
Page-15
Haya de la Torre's APRA party has so far been relatively quiet,
partly out of recognition that its interests would not be served

by opposing a regime which has so completely wrapped itself in

the Peruvian flag.

ll. The main thrust of the regime's short-run domestic
program is to achieve financial stabilization. For the long tern,
according to various published plans and statements, the regime
will probably try to expand state controls over the economy and
increase public investment. The new leaders talk of attempting
to impose larger direct taxes on property, personal income, and
business profits -- where few now exist. The regime is likely
also to move to expand the Peruvian share, public and private, in
the ownership and profits of foreign-owned businesses. Plans
apparently call for proceeding gradually with these measures and
with such costly social reforms as distribution of land to the
peasants, These plans stress increased production and exports,

as well as more equal distribution of income.

12. In foreign affairs, the regime bas already undertaken
to alter Peru's close alignment with the US. It accelerated
Belainde's effort to establish diplomatic and trade relations with

the Soviet Union and other Communist countries. But so far much
Page-16
of this has probably been for show -- part of the general
nationalistic striving for independence 2! Peruvian leaders prob-
ably also hope for increased investment and assistance from West
Europe -- particularly France -- and from Japan. Even if a way
were found to mend US-Peruvian relations soon, the regime would
try to develop its ties with both Commmist and non-Commnist
countries in the hope that these would reduce Peru's future

economic dependence upon the US.

13. Although the members of the regime apparently are united
on most fundamental goals, to a large extent the stridency of
their current nationalism is the creation of President Velasco.

He has made some efforts to offset his ultranationalism by reit-
erating the point that Peru's main difficulty is with IPC alone.
At the same time it seems clear that his attitude toward the US

has become more antagonistic since he took office.

14. Velasco's motives are far from clear. He seems to be a

man caught up in the action-reaction cycle initiated by his

 

a For example, the recent trade agreement with the Soviet Union
provides for most-favored nation treatment and an exchange of
commercial representatives, but specifies that goods will be
paid for in convertible currencies. Peru restricted the number
of the Soviet representatives to seven, and limited their func-
tions. So far there is no provision for Soviet aid. The agree-
ment is apparently a first step and possibly lays the basis for
more detailed negotiations later.

- 13 -

Peet
Page-17
“Pee

sponsorship of the IPC expropriation. He seeks advice where he can
also find personal support, and he uses nationalism demagogically,
to perpetuate his own position. His personal entourage is com-
posed of wen whose views cover the political spectrum from extreme
right to extreme left, but all appear to be ultranationalistic and
anti-American. They are civilians -- including the owners and the
editor of the anti-IPC newspaper El Comercio on the right, and

the dean of the Lima Bar Association on the left -- and they are
military wen whose political inexperience and ambition lead them
to support Velasco's policy of confrontation with the US.

15. There is no evidence so far that the advice or support
of the Peruvian Communist parties has been important to Velasco.
They are weak in leadership and organization, and as a political
force are probably unable to react quickly enough in the fast-
breaking atmosphere of current Peruvian politics to gain influence
with any faction of the regime. In fact, though many of the
officers now in the regime may have a reformist bent, and all may
have been caught up in a wave of nationalism, they also have uni-
formly anti-Communist backgrounds. A number are even concerned
that the regime moved too quickly to establish diplomatic relations
with the Soviet Union.

-UW-

S- -E-T
Page-18
16, In Peruvian society as a whole, extreme leftist ideology
«+ whether specifically Communist or generally Marxist -- has
never had effective appeal. APRA, the strongest party and the
one with the widest popular base, has been anti-Communist for many
years; it controls most of the labor unions and has vigorously
opposed even the slightest inroads into labor by the Communists.
Among intellectuals in Peru, as elsewhere in Latin America, there
are Commmists and other Marxists; this is especially the case
among economists and historians, whose “anti-imperialist" bias
has been evident for many years. Many leftists teach in the uni-
versities, and some even lecture in the Center for Higher Military
Studies. But what appears to give leftists influence with Velasco
is their ultranationalism rather than any loyalty to a foreign
ideology or interest. We have no evidence that their influence
on Velasco is different from or greater than that of other ultra-

nationalist radicals all along the spectrum.

17. It is clear that Velasco does not have the loyalty of
all his cabinet ministers, particularly insofar as his extreme
views on the IPC issue threaten Peru's economic development as well
as its general relationship with the US. Motivations of those who
dissent from his leadership -- known to US observers as the

"noderates" -- are also mixed. They include personal ambition,

-15-
Page-19
aE

general concern for the Peruvian economy, doubts about Velasco's

Abt)
ability and his tack, and conservative views on communism and ex- — FIhI[3)

tremism generally.

FCb)(1)

  

a
1

-16-
Page-20
III. ‘THE ECONOMIC REALITIES

19. The military assumed control at a time of economic
uncertainty which was, in good part, the result of the political
mélaise which characterized the last years of the Belatnde regime.
During the 1950's and early 1960's the Peruvian gross domestic
product grew at an average annual rate of nearly six percent.

This growth resulted mainly from the expansion of exports --
particularly of fishmeal, a new product which now accounts for
one quarter of Peru's export earnings. Increased foreign invest-
ment was also an important factor in some sectors of manufacturing
and export. Yet despite the growth of output and investment,
poverty in Peru is still widespread, and about half the population

lives only on the fringes of the money economy.

20. Starting in 1966, Peru began to have increased difficulty
both with budget deficits and with the balance of payments. In
1967, a widening government deficit, reduction in export earnings,
the growing burden of payments on foreign debt, and flight of
capital brought on a financial crisis and a major devaluation.

For political reasons, the President and the legislature could
not agree on a stabilization program which would clear the way

for renewed growth. Instead, matters worsened, and the failure

-1T-

S-E
Page-21
of the government to adopt a coherent economic policy further
eroded the confidence of Peruvian usinessmen. Finally, several
months before his removal, Belaunde was granted special decree
powers, under which he began a promising stabilization program
that has been continued and in some respects expanded by the mili-

tary government.

2). Whatever its successes in trimming expenditures and
otherwise reducing financial pressures in the short term, the
ability of the military regime to carry out a long-term program of
reform and development will depend oth on its acquisition of in-
creased domestic revenues and upon its ability to stimulate even
greater foreign investment than in the past. Thus, even with
continued US economic assistance a major question for the regime
would be whether it can transform Peru's economic and social
structure without driving foreign and domestic investors away.
The military regime has yet to confront the traditional social
and economic elite, and that group is unlikely to go along easily

with stringent fiscal and tex measures.

22. Furthermore, the objectives of making existing industry
and agriculture more efficient, and of expanding and diversifying

the export sector, will take not only large financial resources,

-18 -
Page-22
put also time, technical skills not yet available from the
educational system, and sophisticated planning. The process of
getting underway on these projects has barely started, and it may
be some time until the power structure of this government shakes

down enough to make substantial progress.

IV. US SANCTIONS AND PERUVIAN REACTIONS

23. The US has not authorized any new development loans for
Peru since July 1967, in effect because of Peru's purchase of
Mirage jet aircraft from France and the subsequent passage of the
Symington and Conte-Long amendments. About $37 million in loans
remains in the pipeline, and technical assistance -- the other
component of AID's program for Peru -- has continued despite
the strain in US-Peruviean relations. Peru's basic export quota
of sugar for the US market in 1969 would involve a prospective
subsidy of about $25 million. By the date on which US sanctions
may be imposed, Peru probably will have shipped about 35 percent
of its annual quota; thus Peru stands to lose some $17 million

in 1969 as a result of its reduced sugar exports to the US.

24. The minimum sanctions required by the Hickenlooper and

Sugar Act amendments would be the suspension of all loans and

-19 -

Pe
Page-23
Pe

grants from AID, of Peru's sugar quote, and of all military
assistance. These suspensions by themselves would not intially
have a severe economic impact on Peru. But US legislation also
requires that the US use its veto power in the Inter-American
Development Bank to prevent new loans to Peru from the Bank's
special funds (though not from its regular resources). Any
important decline in receipts of capital would probably also
create conditions which would prevent Peru from meeting the
financial requirements necessary to permit further drawings
against its standby credit with the International Monetary Fund.
The effect of all these actions would probably be a loss to Peru

of at least $80 million in 1969.

25. Also important is the prospect that the Export-Import
Bank, which has loaned nearly $120 million to Peru since 1961,
would delay new loans for Peruvian development if US sanctions
are imposed. Peru has counted upon future assistance from this
agency to help finance the $600 million copper expansion program
of US-owned companies over the next several years. Similarly, US
influence in the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) is such that its development assistance --

about $140 million during 1961-1968 -- might also be affected.
Page-24
-T

In any case, the IBRD has a long-established policy of deferring
action on loan applications from a member engaged in an important
financial dispute with another member; thus, it probably would not

authorize new loans to Peru unless the US stated it had no objection.

26. If the US and the international lending agencies held up
their programs for Peru, the inflows of private foreign capital,
which had been expected to average about $150 million annually
over the next five years, would probably also be sharply curtailed
-- at least for the next year or so. Even if the only sanctions
imposed were those required by the Hickenlooper and Sugar Act
amendments, there would probably be a considerable reduction in
foreign investment. Private investment by US enterprises has
already been delayed as investors await the outcome of the US~-

Peruvian imbroglio.

27. Velasco has come only slowly to believe that the warning
of US sanctions is more than a bluff. He is known to have doubted
that the US law would be invoked if it directly damaged a US
interest -- in this case W. R. Grace and Company, which accounts
for about one-fifth of Peru's sugar production. Even if the US
tried to limit the number and severity of its sanctions, Velasco's

immediate reaction would probably be vehement. If on the other
Page-25
hand an institution like the IBRD suspended its assistance, he would

probably view it as an additional direct and hostile US action.

28. One response by Peru to the minimum US sanctions might
be to restrict the remittance of profits by US and other foreign
businesses. This would be effective temporarily: Peru could prob-
ably stem that outflow (some $70 to $90 million annually) suffi-
ciently to fully offset the prospective decline in receipts of
capital from official sources. But the net effect of such a step
would be to discourage new foreign investment and to compound
Peru's economic troubles over the Jong term. If it lost a wider
variety of sources of assistance, the Peruvian Government might
respond emotionally and take the extrome step of expropriating
much or all of the remaining US investments in Peru. These prob-
ably have a market value of about $1.5 billion and are located in
all sectors of the economy -- mining, agriculture, manufacturing,

6/

shipping, commerce, communications, and banking.—

 

6/ In addition to W. R. Grace and Company (sugar, textiles,
chemicals, banking, and shipping), the more important invest-
ments are those of the Cerro Corporation (copper) and Southern
Peru Copper Company, the Belco Petroleum Corporation, and the
International Telephone and Telegraph Company. Peru and the
US héPRROVULEORRBEASPecific agreement under which the US
Gove BAHeHE 28Uhrantees US investors that their profits earned
in Peru will be convertible into dollars, but it does not
guarantee them against losses from expropriation.

= 22 -

Fy
Page-26
29. In short, if all the forces now in train continue, the

V. OUTLOOK

crisis with Peru over the IPC case will be a major one -- perhaps
disastrous for Peru and for US-Peruvien relations. For the fore-
seeable future we believe it is unlikely that any Peruvian regime ,
whatever its private disposition toward the US, will be able to
yield sufficiently on the IPC case to satisfy fully the requirements
of US law. A Peruvian leader who attempted this would be accused
of selling out to the US, and would surely come under attack from
a large coalition of popular and military forces united mainly in
their netionalism. Although the economic consequences for Peru
would almost certainly be harsh, especially insofar as anticipated
foreign investment and lending are lost, such considerations would
probably be subordinated to the more irrational and emotional

matter of national pride.

30. We believe the chances are better than even that Velasco
will retain power at least through early April. It is not likely
that he will seek a way to avoid the application of US sanctions
-- his personal position stands to be made stronger whether or not
the US invokes the amendments. His response once sanctions were

applied would probably be harsh-- the more so if the US invoked

- 23 -

Fr
Page-27
Peer

sanctions in addition to the Hickenlooper and Sugar Act amendments.
He would probably send home the US Ambassador, the USAID mission,
and the military missions, but he might allow some lower level US
diplometic personnel to remain. His reaction toward US businesses
would probably be punitive, including some further expropriations
or confiscation of property, if only to prove that he had not been
intimidated. Under extreme conditions he might break diplomatic

relations with the US, and the damage would not be easily repaired.

31. It is not clear whether the moderate group in the cabinet
could exert restraint upon a series of emotional countermoves by
Velasco. The danger is that Velasco so far has been more success-
ful in rallying fellow nationalists than the moderates have been
in restraining his impulses. And populer reaction throughout
Latin America against US sanctions would tend to make Velasco

feel even stronger.

32. Should Velasco be replaced before early April, and a
more moderate regime agree to some form of negotiation, or if
tension on the IPC issue should be reduced by some other means,
the regime would still continue to seek ways to demonstrate its
independence from US economic and political influence. If it

were caught up in a general emotional reaction to widening US

-oh .

S-ES E-T
Page-28
Pre

sanctions, even a government of moderate officers might undertake
some further moves against US business. Particularly vulnerable
if expropriation were contemplated either by Velasco or others

would be US interests in communications, banking, and petroleum.

33. Assuming the present collision course persists, it is
difficult to foresee the domestic political situation in Peru once
US sanctions were imposed. It seems likely that as economic
strains mounted, the regime and the populace would become increas-
ingly frustrated and emotional. With Velasco in power, the regime
could become more radical and begin attacking entrenched Peruvian
economic interests, with the result that a revolutionary situation
could emerge. It is also possible that once anger against the IPC
and the US had vented, the more moderate among the officers would
decide that Velasco had come to the end of his usefulness. In
such circumstances a new military administration might come to

power and slowly try to pick up the pieces.

34. We believe that in any case Peru would not turn rapidly
or wholeheartedly to the Communist countries as a replacement for
lost US aid and investment. For their part, the Soviets would
probably be extremely cautious about undertaking any expensive

commitments to Peru, especially if the longevity of the
- 5 -

S-E: —E-T
Page-29
administration were in question. The Peruvians would be hard
pressed to fill the economic void after their nationalistic
blustering had subsided. They might have some success in obtaining
investment capital from France, Japan, and some others, but we
doubt that all sources taken together would make up more then a
portion of Peru's loss of funds, directly and indirectly, from

US sanctions.

VI. LATIN AMERICAN REACTIONS

35. We believe that the application of even a minimum of
economic sanctions against Peru would precipitate widespread and
vehement criticism of the US among numerous politically articulate
groups in Latin America. They do not generally understand the
facts of the case, or the way in which the US Government works.
It is now conventional for most of them to describe as an inter-
vention any action by a foreign power which affects the internal
political, social, and economic development of a country. And in
this context, the US is not just a foreign power, but rather the
largest foreign investor, trading partner, and source of economic
assistance for nearly all Latin American countries -- a position
which inspires, along with some gratitude, strong suspicion and

resentment.

- 26 -

Se
Page-30
36. Many Latin American governments are already concerned
about US aid and trade policies. Their principal complaints are
that (a) US restrictions on imports rear formidable barriers to
Latin America's exports; (b) US domestic policies have adversely
affected economic developments because they have been 6 major
cause of fluctuations in world market prices for the region's
main exports and in the flow of private US capital to the region;
and (c) US economic assistance programs to Latin America have
generally been meager, paternalistic, and self-serving, and have
failed to compensate the region adequately for the negative effects
of other US policies. While many of these accusations are meant
to gloss over some of the endemic causes for Latin America's

economic failures, they have wide appeal.

37. Thus, while the official reactions of most Latin American
countries to US sanctions against Peru might not be severe, most
governments would become increasingly alarmed about the general
concept of US sanctions, now invoked against a friendly Latin
American country for the first time. Some would feel concerned
about their own vulnerability some day to similar penalties, and

thus they might be responsive to a request by Peru to discuss the
Page-31
matter under Article 16 of the OAS charter 1/ Most countries would
not want to be in a position of having to take sides by voting,
but if the full force of US sanctions were imposed the official
govenmental support for Peru in Latin America would probably be
stronger and more immediate. Many would take the occasion to air
their own bilateral grievances with US economic and assistance

policies.

38. Of greater concern to the US than the likely immediate
response among Latin American governments, however, is the way in
which this application of US sanctions might come to be viewed as
the most recent end threatening in a series of US interventions
over the past century. Many would draw a parallel between US
actions against Peru and its earlier economic actions against
Cuba. All would worry that the sanctions indicated that the new
US Administration intended to follow harsher and less forthcoming
policies than did its predecessors. The Hickenlooper and Sugar

Act amendments fit the Letin view that the US will go to great

 

7/ "No state may use or encourage the use of coercive measures

~ of an economic or political character inorder to force the
sovereign will of another state and obtain from it advantages
of any kind."
Page-32
S-

 

lengths to protect US business interests abroad, and that other
aspects of official US interest in the hemisphere come second.
Thus, we believe that « number of countries will press harder

than in the past to broaden their foreign economic and cultural
relations as a means of protecting themselves from heavy dependence
upon the US -- and they may cere much less about how the US views

the propriety of these new relationships.