
Page-17
APPROVED FOR RELEASE

RAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

a
bt

LIBR fORFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

 
    

tory B

Case # NL ie

Document a de ay 29 January 1965

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 5-65

SUBJECT: Political and Economic Strains in Colombia

We believe that the National Front under President Valencia
has become too-weak to ccpe with the growing political and eco-
nomic strains in Colombia and therefore is not likely to survive
the remaining year and one-half of Volencia's term. Responsible
civilian and military leaders will almost certainly try to find a
political remedy for the defects of the system, but, because of
the notorious factionelisn of the components of the National Front,
a change in the system will probably have to be imposed by force.

KHKRKHHHRE

1. The last-minute suspension of the general strike threatened
for 25 January and the removal two days later of a War Minister of
doubtful loyalty to the National Front have, in our view, only
temporarily relieved the acute political and ecmomic preseures

confronting the government of President Valencia. Valencia has

 

10 NOV 1997
Page-18
SBat= Ree

promised to call a special session of Congress in February to deal
with economic problems and the leaders of the National Front may
prove able to devise a formula to weather the current storn of
protest against government policies. We believe, nonetheless,
that the political credit of the Nationel Front already has eroded
beyond recovery and that the system as presently constituted is

unlikely to survive the remaining part of Valencia's term

(to August 1966).

2. The National Front system was written into Colombia's
constitution by the leaders of the Conservative and Liberal
parties primarily as a means of reducing the extreme partican
antagonisms that had produced a decade of neay civil war. This
it has done reascnably well since its inception in 1958.

However, with its requirements for presidential alternation, equal
division of all offices between the two parties, and two-thirds
majorities for major legislation, the National Front has proved

to be an inordinately cumbersome form of government which could
work well only under the best of leadership and the most favorable
of conditions. Neither of these prerequisites is now present:

for the past year or so the government has not been able even to
address itself to the country's urgent social and economic problems

on a sustained basis, much less to alleviate then.
Page-19
Sa

3. President Valencia, a Conservative who took office
in 1962, is inept both as a political leader and as an ad-
ministrator. For the pest year, the factions of the Conser-
vative party nominally supporting the National Front have been
pitterly divided by personal disputes, and for this and other
reasons the Conservative end Liberal directories have been un-
able to cooperate effectively. What is more, the National
Front suffered a major defeat in the March 1964 elections,
losing effective control over Congress. Even if the Presideat
were capable of vigorous leadership and the National Front
parties were capable of close cooperation, it would still prove
extremely difficult to get controversial legislation through

the present Congress.*

4, The poJitical decline of the National Front is in

large part the result of the dismal economic performance of

% The National Front system permits electoral contests among

. Liberals and among Conservatives for the congressional seats
assigned to each party. At present, members supporting the
National Front hold only two seats more than the needed two-
thirds majority in the Chamber of Deputies, too slim a margin
regularly to survive absenteeism and breaches of party dis-
eipline. The remaining seats are held by Conservatives
belonging to the National Popular Alliance (ANP) and by
Idberals belonging to the Revolutionary Liberal. Movement
(MRL), both of which are committed to bringing down the
Nationsl Front.

-3-
Page-20
Serr

the Valencia government. The National Front is an obvious attempt
by Colombia's oligarchy to preserve its traditional political pre-
dominance. Ia order to maintain middle and lower class support for
the system -- and incidentally to qualify for special treatment
under the Alliance for Progress -- the National Front in 1962
launched an impressive plan for accelerated economic expansion and
social reform. But largely because of foreign exchange and
budgetary strains, the Valencia government was forced to abandon
the plan during 1963-1964: economic growth slowed down, bank
credits for middle-class businessmen became more difficult to
obtain, investments in social projects declined, and so did workers'
real wages. In return, the middle and lower class voters in large ,

numbers have deserted the National Front.

5. From time to time the Valencia government has attempted
to relieve its financial strains; invariably, however, its measures
have proved inadequate. What probably has been needed most isa
general devaluation of the Columbian peso, in conjunction with
a strengthening of monetary controls and a substantial increase
in tax revenues. These measures have been strongly opposed by
various special interest groups, and the government has been

either unwilling or unable to pursue them vigorously.
Page-21
pee

6. Economic pressures against the Valencia government
probably will increase during the course of 1965, perhaps to
critical proportions. During recent years, Colombia has managed
to make ends meet in its foreign payments largely by resorting
to huge drawings of short-term credits. Foreign bankers and
suppliers, who in the past had tended to believe that the US
Government would supply generous amounts of financial assistance
to the "showcase" country of the Alliance for Progress whenever
needed, now are worried about Colombia's future solvency and
apparently are beginning to tighten their terms for renewing
credits as they come due. An acceleration of this tendency could
force a major foreign exchange crisis leter this year.* On the
home front, the government, in order to ease’ labor discontent,
may be forced to withdraw the sales tax that recently went into

effect. This could throw its budgetary accounts even further

out of balance.

T. If there is to be an extraordinary governmental change
in Colombia, what form will it take? The most likely forms of

*
The debt repayments affecting the reserve position of the Bank
of the Republic that nominally fell due in 1965 ere in the
renge of US $150-200 millions, equal in yalue to 30-35 percent
of Colombia's total export earnings during 1964 and exceeding
substantially the Bank's uncommitted hard currency reserves.
Page-22
See

change would be a military coup, or a reform of the National Front
system by its present leaders, or possibly some combination of the
two: for exemple, political leaders might invite a military junta
to hold power temporarily during a transition to a new systen.
Extremist groups in Colombia -- Communists, Castroists, end sup-
porters of ex-dictetor Rojas Pinilla -- probebly have the capacity
to bring on a crisis that would force a change in government. They
would be unlikely to increase substantielly their political power
ae a result of a crisis, however, and would almost certainly be

*
incapable of gaining control of the government.

8. <A Military Coup. The removal of Minieter of War
Alberto Ruiz Novoa provably has reduced for the short term the
threat of a military coup. General Ruiz had strong presidential
ambitions: he had been planning to challenge the National Front
candidate in the 1966 election, but ke probably would have seized
upon any opportunity to gain power via a coup, if one could have
been carried off peacefully. Although support for a coup probably
hed grown somewhat in recent weeks, many key officers had opposed

Ruiz's political ambitions. His removal was not at the initiative

 

*
An estimate of the political and revolutionary potentialities
of extremist groups in Colombia is contained in NIE 80/90-64,
"Communist Potentialities in Latin America," dated 19 August

1964, pages 31-36.
Page-23
tet =

of President Velencia, but at the demand of General Gabriel
Rebeiz Pizarro, commander of the Armed Forces, who was seconded
by the commander and the chief of staff of the Army, and subsequently

supported by the commanders of the Navy, the Air Force, and the Police.

9. General Rebeiz, the new Minister of War, can be expected
to support President Valencia for the time being, but pressures
for a military coup can be expected to recur whenever the officer
corps begins to believe that civilian rule is leading to national
disaster. Thus, if the special session of Congress next month
proves totally unpreductive and if a general strike again is
threatened, there probably will be renewed pressures for military
intervention. Military restiveness probably would also increase
if the threat of expanded extremist insurgency raised by the
7 January raid on a town in northcentral Colombia is not dealt

with effectively.*

10. Reform from Within. Heavy pressure would have to be
brought to bear on President Valencia, and on other individuals
and groups, to persuade them to give up all or some of the powers

which they now exercise. The key to any change from within would

 

¥
As distinguished from the violence which has been endemic in
Colombia for many years, this raid was conducted by a well-
orgenized band supported by Cuba. .
Page-24
“4

   

S-EDeREET

probably be the replacement of Velencia by a more effective chief
executive, either outright or by turning presidential powers over
to a de facto prime minister, Faced with the alternatives of chaos,
military intervention, or yielding political power, Valencia might
eventually choose to submit. But the substitution of another
politician for Valencia, even a more forceful one, would not in
itself provide a remedy for the factionalism and immobilism of the
Netional Front system -- and any attempt to alter the system itself

could probably be accomplished only by coercion.

ll. Is the National Front system therefore likely to be over-
thrown by force? The issue remains in doubt. Responsible civilian
and military leaders, remembering both the Rojas Pinilla dictuter-
ship and the chaotic situation which preceded it, will almost
certainly try hard to find a political remedy for the present
defects of the system, but the notorious personalism and factionalism
of the components of the National Front will militate against such
a solution of the problem. It would appear that, in the end, a
reform of the system will have to be imposed -- or else the political,

economic, and security situation in Colombia will continue to
Page-25
deteriorate, to the advantage of the advocates of a violent

social revolution.

FOR TRE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

herve Kee

SEERMAN KENT
Chairman