
Page-1
COPY NO.
POR THE ASSISTANT o

EGRET : POR RPPANUS AND Early yiss

POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CHANGES
IN WESTERN EUROPE SINCE THE LAST
CONFERENCE OF FOREIGN MINISTERS

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

 

ORE 58-49

Published 1 June 1949

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Document Wo. arte : TH ADCHIVER & AECORES

   
     

 

: vaaRPEUATELY APTES USE
pe Becuassiv¥p HARMED 8 %
Class. Mo: a7 LITA ax 2°

BEERAT Ec
226026
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army
c. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable ‘security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board
Page-3
ORE 58-49

POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CHANGES IN WESTERN EUROPE SINCE THE LAST
CONFERENCE OF FOREIGN MINISTERS

SUMMARY

At the breakdown of the last Conference of Foreign Ministers (CFM) in London
in December 1947, the general situation among the continental nations of Western
Europe, except for the Scandinavian bloc, was favorable for Communist exploitation.
Although there was little danger from Communism in the UK, the country had just
passed through the worst of its postwar economic crisis, and economically the future
was extremely uncertain. France and Italy were politically and economically un-
stable, and Italy’s allegiance in the cold war was doubtful. The over-all situation in
Germany was extremely grave as a result of industrial stagnation and near starvation.

In the sixteen months which have elapsed since the conclusion of the last CFM,
the strategic position in Europe of the Western Powers has materially improved.
France, Italy, Norway, and Denmark are now firmly in the western camp. France
and Italy possess moderate and relatively stable governments; both nations are
making rapid strides toward economic rehabilitation. The UK, Benelux, and the
Scandinavian states, through their own economic improvement and cooperative efforts,
are contributing to the economic recovery of the entire region. Although in Western
Germany the political and economic situations have shown marked improvement, the
area remains of immediate concern to US security. In Austria, the Western Powers
have more than held their own in the East-West struggle. In general all the states
of Western Europe have come, since December 1947, to view the problems in Germany
in much the same light as they are viewed by the US and the UK. In general, too, the
governments and peoples of Western Europe have come to a much clearer realization
of the menace to themselves of international Communism and have evinced a hardier
determination to combat it, and to combat the activities of national Communist
Parties as well.

Only in the Iberian Peninsula has the situation deteriorated. Deterioration in
that area, while posing long-range problems, some of which the US may be called
upon to solve, is not of serious immediate importance in the present phase of the East-
West conflict.

Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air
Force have concurred in this report. The information contained herein is as of 18 May
1949,

1 Sreret
Page-4
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CHANGES IN WESTERN EUROPE SINCE THE LAST
CONFERENCE OF FOREIGN MINISTERS

THE GENERAL SITUATION IN DECEMBER 1947

At the breakdown of the last Conference of Foreign Ministers (CFM) in London in
December 1947, the general situation among the continental nations of Western Europe,
except for the Scandinavian bloc, was favorable to a Communist advance. The govern-
ment of the UK was stable; the population in general was definitely pro-Western, and
there was little likelihood of Communist gains through political or any other type of
activity. The country had just passed through the worst of its postwar economic
crisis, but the future was extremely uncertain, with lack of dollars causing grave appre-
hension. France and Italy, the two major sovereign continental states, were still suffer-
ing from the political and economic instability resulting from World War I, and still
appeared in danger from strong Communist minorities, although in France, Communist

- influence had begun to decline. Many of the smaller powers such as Switzerland, the
Benelux countries, and Scandinavia, were politically and economically stable or were
showing, signs of becoming so. Communist political domination of the UK was a
virtual impossibility. In Germany, the internal political situation was dominated by
apathy and inertia; economically, conditions were extremely grave with industrial
stagnation and near starvation. The four occupying powers were deadlocked in the
Allied Control Council. By default, therefore, a revolutionary situation was develop-
ing which, if unchecked, could have presented the numerically weak Communists with
a field for exploitation. In Austria the anticommunist government, although stable,
was subject to the severe pressures of four-power occupation and economic hardship.

The Third Force coalition which governed France gave little assurance of stability;
it was threatened on the one hand by a powerful Communist Party which controlled
the principal labor union, and on the other by the political party led by the aspiring
Charles de Gaulle. The economy of the country, gravely damaged by the war and
the German occupation and suffering from inflation, had just been severely shaken
by a nation-wide series of Communist-led strikes accompanied by sabotage. Although
Premier Schuman’s firm handling of the strikes had raised the prestige of his govern-
ment, the specter of civil war between Communists and Gaullists remained in the back-
ground.

Italy, whose economy was in many respects in worse condition than that of France,
was ruled by a provisional government with a slim parliamentary majority composed
of Christian Democrats and several moderate parties. Its stability depended mainly on
continuation of US aid. The Italian Communist Party which was threatening the gov-
ernment with an intensified campaign of strikes and violence, and possibly with revolu-
tion, was the largest and best organized in Europe outside the USSR. To combat these
Physical threats, which would have ruined the’ country economically, if carried out

3 Beret

Cpt blanky
Page-5
. faa

successfully, the provisional government possessed a police force and an army, both
suffering from poor leadership, few arms, and little mobility. In addition, Italy had no
dollar credits for the purchase of essential food and raw materials.

The governments of France and Italy were both moderate and were, along with
the majority of the people, desirous of remaining in the Western bloc. In view of their
many problems, their paucity of resources, and the strength and militancy of their
Communist minorities, they appeared to have little more than an even chance of
remaining in power. Had they fallen, France would probably have been ruled by a
rightist government under De Gaulle, and Italy by the Communists. In either case,
civil war might well have followed to the probable advantage of the USSR.

With the near approach of another CFM, it is pertinent to review the changes

affecting US security which have occurred in Western Europe during the sixteen months
that have elapsed since the last meeting in London.

THE UNITED KINGDOM

The UK’s chief weakness in December 1947 was its economic situation, which had
but just begun to turn upwards from its postwar depths. Today, the whole fiscal and
financial outlook is greatly improved. Inflation has been checked. Rationing and
other restrictions have been eased. The economy is, however, and must for some time
be, strictly controlled. Britain’s external payments on current account are in over-all
balance, but a large deficit in dollars (now met by ECA funds), remains the greatest
problem. The pound is gaining strength and is even becoming scarce. The general
economic and financial prestige of the UK has greatly increased since the end of 1947.

While there has been no question of morale in the British armed services in the
event of war, and although their organization has improved over the past sixteen
months, the UK’s over-all military capabilities are low in relation to extensive defense
commitments. Scientific research and staff work in the higher levels were and are
excellent, and the reserve position of the services, with several million combat veterans,
is good. Despite the relative weakness of the military potential, capabilities for the
defense of the UK have improved since December 1947.

While the UK has differed occasionally with the US in the emphases on and ap-
proach to the German problem, the UK Government was and is in fundamental agree-
ment with that of the US. The population is kindly disposed toward German recovery
provided security safeguards are enforced and reasonable French fears are placated.
The UK Government in general favors the German Socialist Party and socialization, both
on principle and as a deterrent to either a Communist or a rightist dictatorship. It
is less sanguine than the US on the chances of inculcating a genuine democratic spirit
among the Germans. Concern is beginning to be felt over rising German industrial
competition.

While there has never been any doubt about British disposition to resist Communist
expansion, Britain’s capabilities to this end have been increased as a result of progress
toward economic recovery which has: enhanced the UK’s prestige and influence in

wena 4
Page-6
|
international relations; strengthened its willingness to maintain, and even to expand
overseas undertakings related to strategic objectives; and confirmed its readiness to |
support its present military budget. |
:.\ France has made marked progress toward political and economic stability since
December 1947. Industrial production is at a level 25 percent above prewar; foreign |
trade is improving-and greater confidence in the franc is manifest. The Communists
have lost support throughout the country, and no longer pose an immediate serious
threat to the government. Although the Gaullist movement remains an important
political factor, the likelihood of De Gaulle’s coming to power is greatly diminished,
while the specter of civil war has been exorcised. French military capabilities in
terms of trained manpower and available equipment are generally the same as they
were a year and a half ago, but reliance ‘on collective security pacts and the hope for
US military aid promise improvement in French military capabilities. The:French 1
armed forces are capable of suppressing any uprising or threat to security arising in-

. |

 

side the country. 7

In December 1947 French policy was not far removed from De Gaulle’s original !
concept of a weak Germany, which involved separation of the Rhineland, internation-
alization of the Ruhr, and economic union of the Saar with France. Since that date,
France has made concessions regarding trizonal fusion, the occupation statute, dis-
mantling, and the establishment of a west German state. At the CFM, the French
will probably continue their present close cooperation with the US-UK position on
Germany and will probably oppose any USSR effort to establish a centralized Germany.

In French North and West Africa, however, the situation has deteriorated slightly
since December 1947. Reduction of French armed forces in the area, necessitated
by military operations in Indochina, has increased the possibility of difficulty in con-
trolling disorders among the natives. Moreover, the discouragement of nationalist
leaders, caused by French policy and by their failure to achieve moral support from
the US or material assistance from the Arab League for their aspirations, enhances
the possibility that they may come to a working arrangement with the Communist
Party.

ITALY

Italy, which in December 1947 ‘was in serious danger of becoming a Communist
state, is now possessed of a stable moderate government, and a rapidly improving
economy. By signing the Atlantic Pact, Italy has aligned itself with the West. Al-
though its armed forces are incapable of preventing an invasion, they are strong enough
to suppress any revolutionary uprising. The economic rehabilitation of the country
under ERP has successfully passed the opening phases, and the government is finally
taking steps to provide a land reform program. While Communist Party membership
and influence over labor have declined, a large Communist opposition still remains
ready to exploit any failure of the government to effect adequate reforms. Such a

5 Siekee—
Page-7
failure could swing a decisive sector of the electorate over to the Communists in the
national elections of 1953. .,

In December 1947 the Italians were bitter against Hitler and the Nazi leaders
who had led Italy into a disastrous military venture, but as a whole they held no
violent animosity toward the German people. At present, many members of the
Italian Government, aware of Germany’s former importance to Italian markets, desire
the inclusion of Germany in any Western European economic unfon and believe that
the reconstruction of Germany is essential to European recovery. Some conservative
italian elements would welcome the military revival of Germany as a powerful bar to
further Soviet aggression.

SCANDINAVIA

The situation with respect to Sweden is little changed from what it was in Decem-
ber.1947. - The government, although it has lost its absolute majority in the lower
house, remains stable. Any conceivable change would not preclude the continuance
of a stable democratic regime. The economic position was good and is slightly im-
Proved with respect to the contribution Sweden can make to general European
recovery. The government and the people were and are basically friendly to the US
and fear Soviet expansion. In the past sixteen months there has been an increase in
the government’s willingness to support the US position in the East-West struggle and
to accept the US as the leader in opposing aggressive Soviet moves; however, Sweden
prefers to continue her traditional neutrality rather than participate in the North
Atlantic Pact. During the same period, the population has come to a greater realiza-
tion that Swedish Communists are agents of the USSR and has more actively resisted
Communist infiltration.

While opposed to a revival of German nationalism and militarism, the Swedes
wish to see. Germany economically restored so that the profitable prewar trade may be
resumed.

The Swedish armed forces are relatively strong for a small power and would resist
aggression with great determination. Without foreign assistance, however, they could
not hold off Soviet attack for more than a few weeks.

The government of Norway was and is stable. The country’s economy is steadily
improving. In December 1947, the nation was reluctant to commit itself definitely
to the West lest it offend the USSR, but it has now joined the Atlantic Pact. Norway
opposes the re-establishment of German military power, but, like most other European
nations, desires the revival of German economy in the interest of trade. Norway was
and is chiefly important to the US in that it might become a base of operations in an
East-West war, and by reason of its possession of the world’s third largest merchant
fleet.

Following the lead of Norway, Denmark has overcome its disinclination to pursue
a vigorous foreign policy and its desire to remain aloof from the East-West struggle
and has joined the Atlantic Pact as its best chance for future security. Since the last
CFM the Danish Government has been strengthened, and Communist influence, never
great, has declined, particularly in the labor movement.

Deeger 6
Page-8
BENELUX

The Netherlands, in December-1947, was reluctant to enter any binding military
or political agreements with other Western nations and was striving to maintain a
neutral position in the East-West struggle. The economic situation, while improving
over.the immediate. postwar period, required trade with other states without which
it could, have become a threat to Western European economic recovery and stability.
At, present, Dutch-US relations are closer than in 1947, and the Positive value of the
Netherlands to US security has increased considerably. Internal economic recovery,
Progress toward the Benelux Economic Union, and expanded trade with all of Western
Europe—all greatly assisted by ECA—have strengthened the Dutch economic position.
Dutch willingness to participate in Western Union and the Atlantic Pact and to assume
@ more active role in Western European affairs indicates a determination to remain
closely allied with the West. Dutch military strength in Europe will remain negligi-
ble until the Indonesian conflict: is resolved. Dutch-US friction over Indonesia has
increased but has not seriously hampered cooperation on other problems.

At the time of the last CFM, the Dutch were more fearful of the revival of a
powerful Germany than were the occupying powers but wanted enough German
€conomic recovery ‘to stimulate Dutch-German trade. Dutch participation in dis-
cussions on the Ruhr, following the failure of the London CFM, brought Dutch views
on Germany more in line with those of the Western occupying powers. The Dutch
are now less concerned with reparations and desire sufficient German recovery to
permit active German participation in Western European trade.

Little change has occurred in Belgium’s attitude toward the East-West struggle
in the past sixteen months. Changes in the political and economic positions in
Belgium have been changes in degree rather than in kind. Usually a supporter of
the US-UK, Belgium’s active participation in thé Western European Union and the
Atlantic Pact, and its greater integration with Western Europe through participation
in ERP have enhanced the value of Belgium as an ally of the US. Conversely, closer
Belgian association with the West during the past sixteen months, accompanied by
declining Communist influence and a growing will to resist Sovietization, have de-
creased Belgium’s value to the USSR both as a potential sphere of influence and as
a Soviet-occupied area‘in the event of war. Belgium’s strong economic Position has
contributed to recovery in Western Europe, and, although its military capabilities have
not increased, the nation has the potential for expanding and improving its armed
forces.

As in the case of the Netherlands, Belgium in December 1947 feared the resusci-
tation of a powerful Germany but desired a revival of Belgian-German trade. The
inclusion of Belgium in the Western Powers’ discussion on Germany following the
breakdown of the CFM at London has brought Belgian views closely in line with those
of the Western occupation powers. Belgium now wants a politically federated but
economically united Germany with sufficient economic recovery to permit greater
German contributions to the Western European economy.

7 @ctir
Page-9
In the past sixteen months, Luxembourg’s value to US security has been enhanced
insofar as that little state has become more closely associated with other Western
European countries in ERP, Western Union, and the Atlantic Pact. With continuing
political stability and economic prosperity, Luxembourg, in its own small way, is a
stabilizing factor in Western Europe. With the abandonment of its traditional neu-
trality, Luxembourg has advanced far ir its attitude toward international and regional
cooperation. Generally, Luxembourg follows the Belgian lead in foreign affairs but is
more acutely aware of a possible threat from a revitalized and aggressive Germany.

GERMANY

In Western Germany the economic’and political situations in December 1947 were
little removed from the chaos resulting from total military defeat and subsequent
Allied policies of dismantling, decartelization, and denazification. Both the Bizonal
Council and the Laender governments were required to follow Allied directives in these
matters and at the same time legislate for the German people in such a way as to bring
into effect the democratic objectives upon which Allied occupation was founded.’ With-
out political experience, strong leaders, or popular support, the German governmental
agencies established by the occupying powers were compelled to struggle against the
apathy and inertia induced by the ruin of the country and the almost hopeless task of
reconstruction and rehabilitation. The problem of the people was one of mere survival
amid the wreckage of their former existence and the conflicting policies and systems
imposed by their conquerors.

At the end of 1947 Western Germany faced economic disaster. Industry was func-
tioning at a very low level; the currency was worthless except for the purchase of
limited food supplies which were in such short supply that many sections of the coun-
try were threatened with starvation. There was little incentive either to work or to
save. Heavy imports of food from the US kept the population alive, but in view of
the financial situation the Germans could do little to revive and to rehabilitate industry.
Agriculture was depressed; crops were 50 percent of normal, and Western Germany was
cut off by Soviet action from its usual source of food from Eastern Germany.

The importance of Western Germany to US security has been considerably en-
hanced since December 1947. The three western zones, constituting a valuable indus-
trial area available to the West and denied to the USSR, have shown signs of great
economic recovery in the past twelve months. The people, who always detested occu-
pation but preferred that of the Western Powers to that of the Soviet Union, have come
even more to detest the USSR as a result of the Berlin blockade, and have given cor-
respondingly greater support to the West because of the success of the air lift.
The unsatisfied demand for consumer goods in short supply, coupled with the tre-
mendous postwar increase in currency in circulation, raised prices more rapidly than
wages, and has brought about labor unrest. Industrial production, however, has prac-
tically doubled, since currency reform in June 1948, and business has been greatly
stimulated. ECA has assured industry of an adequate supply of raw materials, but
war damage, dismantling, and obsolete equipment have tended to limit capacity in

“nnanrf 8
Page-10
the absence of capital for replacement and reconstruction. Heavy food imports are
still required to maintain the 2,000-calorie ration, but the 1948 crop yield was about
80 percent of prewar and represented a considerable improvement over 1947. The
proposed new German Government is still an unknown and untested entity with many
points of disagreement, real and potential, between German leaders and the occupation
authorities. Since 1947, the Germans have become increasingly aware of their renewed
importance.as a factor in the European balance of power.

. The situation in the eastern zone of Germany has changed little during the period :
under discussion. Economically, the zone has deteriorated somewhat, largely because
of.Soviet occupation policies including that of ruthlessly bleeding the country for the |
benefit.of the USSR. The deterioration has not, however, reached an alarming state |
in terms of Soviet security. The stability of the Communist-controlled governmental .
agencies in the Zone was and still is guaranteed by the presence of the Red Army.

AUSTRIA

Comparison of conditions in Austria at the end of the last CFM with those existing
today shows that essentially Austria’s importance to US security, and conditions within
the country which constitute fundamental problems, have not altered.. Efforts by the
US, the UK, and France to treat the Austrian problem separately from that of
Germany and. the East-West conflict have not so far been successful in effecting a
treaty and ending the occupation of this liberated country. Despite very considerable |
economic improvement and continued strong political stability, the uncertainties of
Austria’s future loom as large now as they did in December 1947. Soviet capabilities . |
in Eastern Austria, based on military occupation, have in no way diminished. In one
respect conditions in ‘Austria and Austria’s position in Western Europe have assumed |
anew importance. Austria has remained a pro-Western and democratic nation whose |
cooperation with the US, although partly motivated by economic necessity, has been
maintained in the face of Soviet occupation and pressure and despite encirclement on
three sides by Soviet-controlled areas. The fate of Austria and US policies in regard '
to it may have a far-reaching effect in continuing the consolidation of Western
Europe, both politically and economically, and in strengthening the morale of the
Western European people and their determination to resist Soviet aggression. This
effect may be greater than the position, size, and potentialities of the country on the :
East-West struggle would seem to warrant.

 

IBERIA

|
:
|
On the Iberian Peninsula, the changes which have occurred since the London |
CFM have resulted from a deteriorating economic situation. In Spain, in December |
1947, the general economic, situation was better than at present, but the general |
|

|

|

|

standard of living was extremely low. Spain’s economy continues to deteriorate.
This could lead to government breakdown and disorder. Should such conditions arise,
the Communist Party—small but well organized—would make a determined effort
to exploit them. It would not, however, be able to take control of the country.
Page-11
‘The morale of the armed forces has declined, but Franco retains their loyalty. So
long as this is the case, he will remain in power.

The attitude of the people and of the government toward Germany remains un-
altered. Radical supporters of the Franco regime are sympathetic toward Germany,
but the majority of the People are indifferent. During the war the common people
were pro-Ally. .

In December 1947, although: indications ‘had appeared that such war-induced
prosperity was terminating, Portugal was still enjoying the prosperity brought to it
by the war. Today the economic situation’ is rapidly deteriorating. Portugal has
encountered great difficulty in marketing its exports, but at the same time must keep
its imports at a high level. Portuguese foreign exchange is nearly exhausted; yet
wheat, petroleum, and other essentials must be bought abroad. Little danger existed
in December 1947 from the Portuguese Communist Party, and little danger exists
today.

The Portuguese attitude toward Gerinany. has undergone almost no change. The
government and the upper classes were and are favorably disposed toward a settlement
which would permit Germany to function again as a nation. The people have little
interest in the problem.
. SWITZERLAND

There have been few fundamental changes in Switzerland since December 1947.
In the East-West struggle Switzerland has reaffirmed its neutrality, but there is some
indication that it is collaborating economically more with the West than with the
East. The Swiss are generally less suspicious of US motives in Europe than they were
sixteen months ago. Switzerland continues to enjoy great prosperity.

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

It would appear that during the period between the last CFM and the present, the
strategic position in Europe of the Western Powers has materially improved. France,
Italy, Norway, and Denmark are now firmly in the Western camp. France and Italy
now possess moderate and relatively stable governments; both nations are making rapid
strides toward economic rehabilitation, and both have shown a material improvement in
the organization and training of their military establishments, even if the improvement
in material has not been great. The UK, Benelux, and the Scandinavian states, through
their own economic improvement and cooperative efforts, are contributing to the
economic recovery of the entire region. Although in Western Germany the political
and economic situations have shown marked improvement, the area remains of
immediate concern to US security. In Austria, the Western Powers have more than
held their own in the East-West struggle. In general, all the states of Western Europe
have come, during the past sixteen months, to view the problems in Germany in much
the same light as they are viewed by the US and the UK. While France still greatly fears
a resurgence of German military might, the French have accepted the broad principles
of the tripartite plan for revival of the German economy and the establishment of a
political system for Western Germany. In general, too, the governments and peoples

deer 10
Page-12
of Western Europe have come to a much greater realization of the menace to themselves
of international Communism and have evinced a hardier determination to combat it.
They, too, have come to recognize the fact that national Communist Parties owe
allegiance to Moscow alone and that the USSR is, therefore, the real and only danger
to their security.

Only in the Iberian Peninsula has the situation deteriorated. Deterioration in
that area, while posing long-range problems, some of which the US may be called upon
to solve, is not of serious immediate importance in the present phase of the East-West
conflict.

 

u seexnt
Page-13
iy

 

 

 

62 OT iz NAP 66h

\s/5

U. §. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
ATTI-STATE—1949