
Page-1
eRe

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES OF COMMUNIST
CONTROL OF GREECE IN THE ABSENCE
OF US COUNTERACTION

ORE 69

Published on
9 FEBRUARY 1948

Copy No._**

 

ay

us
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

ce. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with

applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

SPOS

   
   
    

ument contains information affecting the nati
defense 0! ted States within the
Espionage Act, 50 US.CUS mended. Its trans-
mission or m. of its contents in
‘uthorized person is prohibited by law.
Page-3
* Central Intelligence Agency SaeRRE

ORE 69 / Copy No.__3

 

POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES OF COMMUNIST CONTROL OF GREECE IN THE
ABSENCE OF US COUNTERACTION

SUMMARY

1. Assumption: that the “Markos Government” has gained effective control of all
Greece, including Crete and the Aegean and Ionian Islands.

2. The problem: to estimate the consequences of the assumed development in the
absence of specific US counteraction.

3. A direct consequence of the assumption would be that the USSR would gain
access to advance bases for: (a) military domination of the Straits; (b) envelopment
of Turkey; and (c) interdiction of waterborne traffic in the Eastern Mediterranean.

4. Far more disastrous than the loss of Greece itself would be the psychological
and potitical repercussions of that event. These repercussions, if unchecked by US
counteraction, could result in international panic.

5. There would be an immediate clamor for US economic assistance and military
guarantees on a scale far exceeding what would have been required to prevent the fall
of Greece and involving greater risk of collision with the USSR.

6. Iran and the Kurdish area of Iraq would probably fall under Soviet domination,
giving the USSR effective control of the Iranian and Iraqi oil fields. Turkey and the
Arab States would continue to resist Soviet domination, but would be in grave jeopardy.

7. Italy would probably go Communist within a few months. In France, however,
DeGaulle would come to power. Great Britain would seek urgently to check the reper-
cussions of the fall of Greece and to this end would press for US commitment to a defi-
nite program of combined strategic counteraction. Spain would seek to escape from
political isolation into military alliance with the US.

8. From the economic point of view, the most serious consequence of the fall of
Greece would be the possible loss of the petroleum resources of the Middle East (40 per-
cent of proven world reserves) through political repercussions in that area. Another
serious possibility would be that of Communist “capture” of the Greek and Italian mer-
chant fleets. Otherwise the USSR would gain no great benefit, nor would the US and
Western Europe suffer any great loss from Soviet control of Greece, Italy, or Iran.

9. The European Recovery Program would be little affected by the loss of Greece,
per se, but it would suffer severe adverse effects from the psychological and political
repercussions of that event.

Note: The information in this report is as of 28 January 1948, at which time the report was sub-
mitted to the member agencies of the Interdepartmental Advisory Council for coordination.

The Intelligence Division, Department of the Army, and the Air Intelligence Division, Direc-
torate of Intelligence. Department of the Air Force, have concurred in the military aspects
of this paper but have not commented on the political aspects. The statement of the Intelli-
gence Organization of the Department of State disassociating itself from the paper is set
forth in Enclosure “A.” The dissent of the Office of Naval Intelligence, Navy Department,
is set forth in Enclosure “B.” :

1 SECRET
Page-4
of

POSSIBLE CONSEQUENCES OF COMMUNIST CONTROL OF GREECE IN THE
ABSENCE OF US COUNTERACTION

ASSUMPTIONS
1. Communist ConTROL OF GREECE.

For the purposes of this estimate it is assumed that the “Provisional Democratic
Government of Free Greece” (the “Markos Government”) has gained effective control
of all Greece, including Crete and the Aegean and Ionian Islands.

2. US Reacrion

A further assumption is necessary in order to estimate the consequences of Com-
munist control of Greece. Foreign developments are in large measure determined by
the actions and supposed intentions of the US. No valid estimate of prospective devel-
opments can be made without authoritative information or assumptions regarding
pertinent US intentions and capabilities. In the instant case, the fact that the US
had permitted Communist seizure of Greece would be taken generally to indicate the
absence of any effective US intention to prevent further Soviet aggression, and this
supposition would have more far-reaching consequences than would the fall of Greece
per se. A prompt and vigorous US reaction, however, would tend to check these reper-
cussions. Thus the consequences of Communist control of Greece would depend essen-
tially on the US reaction thereto. Inasmuch as we cannot prejudge the US reaction,
our estimate of other reactions must be based on the only assumption open to us:
that existing US plans and policies (e.g., the European Recovery Program) continue to
be carried out as presently indicated, but that no new commitments are made. Our
estimate of the consequences of Communist control of Greece is then our appreciation
of what would probably happen in the absence of specific US counteraction.

DIRECT CONSEQUENCES
3. GENERAL

By the very fact of Communist control of Greece the USSR would complete its
controi of the Balkan Peninsula (except for Turkish Thrace) and would thereby gain
certain local advantages, such as:

a. Further consolidation of the Soviet position in Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and
Albania by the elimination of (1) the subversive example of a relatively independent
and democratic neighboring state, and (2) a long land frontier across which there
might have been substantial infiltration of subversive ideas and agents into the Balkan
Satellite States.

b. Elimination of a potential beachhead which, in time of war, might have
served as a base for operations in defense of the Straits and for the liberation of the
Balkans.

¢. Acquisition of potential advance bases in Greece.

4. Soviet CapaBILities FROM GREEK BASES.

From air and naval bases in Greek territory the USSR, at slight cost in terms of
additional occupation and defense commitment, could (a) dominate the Straits and
the Aegean approach thereto; (b) extend, on the west, the existing double envelopment
of Turkey; and (c) interdict waterborne traffic in the Eastern Mediterranean.

2 sofeer
Page-5
po

The airfields presently existing in Greek territory, although generally unsuitable
for use by US Air Force standards, could probably be made ready to accommodate
lighter Soviet aircraft with relatively slight engineering effort. From Greek bases
Soviet bombers with fighter escort could reach Tripoli, Cairo, or Haifa.

Soviet naval action from Greek bases would be limited primarily to the use of
submarines.

By air and submarine operations from Greek bases the USSR could endanger
shipping throughout the Eastern Mediterranean and effectively close to traffic the
passage between Crete and Cirenaica.

5. Psycuovocican Errect.

Far more important than any advantage to be gained by the possession of Greece
itself would be the profound psychological shock which would be felt around the
world. The fall of Greece would constitute the first actual extension of Soviet terri-
torial control since the Soviet armies halted at the conclusion of World War II. The
Soviet acquisition of control over Eastern Europe could be accepted as an inevitable
but incidental consequence of operations directed toward the defeat of Germany and as
Possible only in the special circumstances of that time. The subversion of Greece three
years later would be an ominous portent that the USSR was capable of successful
aggression in present circumstances and that further Soviet advances were to be
expected. That the subversion of Greece could be accomplished in defiance of the
“Truman Doctrine” would convince all concerned, both Communist and anti-Commu-
nist, that assurances of US support afforded no effective guarantee against Soviet
aggression and that all who ventured to resist the inexorable advance of the USSR did
so at their dire peril.

POLITICAL REPERCUSSIONS

6. GENERAL.

The fall of Greece would cause every Government, including that of the USSR,
to revise its estimate of the situation. The USSR would be emboldened to press its
evident advantage and to allow the anti-Communist world no opportunity to rally.
Every non-Communist government would re-examine its policy to determine whether
it conformed to the true national interest in the altered circumstances. In addition,
popular reactions would affect domestic political alignments and the stability of various
governments. Initial reactions to events in Greece would be compounded by reactions
to developments in other countries, with strong possibilities for international panic.
The consequent instability of the world situation would be out of all Proportion to the
intrinsic importance of Greece.

7. TURKEY.

Soviet control of Greece would most directly threaten Turkey; Communist acces-
sion to power in Greece would lead to a renewal of Soviet demands regarding the
Straits and northeastern Turkey. Turkish resistance to these demands would prob-
ably be as resolute as in the past. At the same time Turkey would demand of the US
greatly increased economic assistance and military guarantees. As Soviet pressure
continued the Turks might yield minor concessions (e.g., air rights) not directly affect-

3 ofr
Page-6
afr:

ing Turkish territorial integrity, in order to gain time and impress on the United States
the danger that Turkey might fall into the Soviet orbit. Eventually, increasing isola-
tion and economic disruption would undermine Turkey's ability to resist the USSR,
however strong the will to do so.

8. Iran.

Iran would immediately demand of the US increased economic assistance and
military guarantees. Lacking these, Iranian will and ability to resist the USSR would
dissolve. Under the external pressure of the USSR and the internal pressure of leftist
elements and regional interests, the Iranian Government would be compelled to curtail
US influence, admit leftists to positions in the administration, and grant economic
concessions to the USSR (e.g., the desired oil concession). These developments would
stimulate existing disruptive tendencies in Iran and lead to increasing assertion of
provincial and tribal autonomy. The process thus begun would result in the disinte-
gration of Iran and Soviet domination of the country, including eventual Soviet control
of the oil fields of southwestern Iran.

9. Tue Kurps.

Kurdish autonomy in northwestern Iran would stimulate nationalistic aspirations
among the Kurds in neighboring areas of Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. This development,
encouraged by the USSR, could, in the circumstances, lead to a Soviet capability at
least to prevent effective operation of the Kirkuk oil field in northern Iraq.

10. Tue Araz Srares.

Fearing the USSR and lacking confidence in the power of Great Britain to protect
them, the Arab Governments would call on the United States for economic assistance
and military guarantees. If this call went unanswered, US influence in the Arab world,
already severely damaged by US support of Zionism, would be destroyed by loss of
confidence in US capabilities and intentions. The Arabs would not turn to the USSR
as an alternative to the US. Lacking any reliable outside support, they would turn
inward, with a consequent intensification of nationalism, Pan-Arabism, and xenophobia.
All restraint on the Arab reaction to the situation in Palestine would disappear: a full-
scale holy war to expel European Jewish intruders from that country could readily
develop. Attacks on US nationals and property would increase: although oil installa-
tions in Saudi Arabia might be relatively secure for the time being, the operation of
pipe lines to the Mediterranean would become impossible.

Although the initial Arab reaction, indicated above, would be unifying in effect,
the isolation of the Arab States would in the long term favor the recrudescence of latent
disruptive forces such as ethnic separatism (e.g., of the Kurds, Assyrians, Druzes),
dynastic rivalries (as between the Hashimites and Ibn Saud), and ancient tribal feuds.
The USSR would be active in exciting and exploiting these disruptive tendencies, and
in stirring up mass discontent with the existing economic and political order in the
Arab States. Eventualiy Arab Governments might find themselves facing a choice
between coming to terms with the USSR or being overthrown and replaced by govern-
ments subservient to the Soviet Union. This situation could arise most readily in
Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Egypt. Saudi Arabia will prove relatively stable during the

4 f=
Page-7
f=

lifetime of Ibn Saud, but on his death will tend to break up, with consequent jeopardy
to US oil interests there in the circumstances envisaged.
11. Ivaty.

Continued reliance on US support would be the only course open to the De Gasperi
Government. It would clamor for greatly increased economic aid and for military
guarantees. The disillusionment of the Italian people would be such, however, that,
without convincing evidence of a new US determination to defend Italy on such a scale
as to guarantee that country against becoming a battleground, De Gasperi’s popular
support would tend to disintegrate. The Communists, as the only practical alternative
to De Gasperi in the circumstances, would correspondingly gain strength. If a
free election were to be held, this popular reaction would probably carry the Commu-
nists to power by political processes. If not, the demoralization of their opponents
would probably permit the Communists to seize power by force. One way or the other,
the fall of Greece to international Communism would probably be followed within a
few months by the fall of Italy.

12. FRANCE.

The Schuman Government would fall almost at once, but in France the immediate
alternative to Schuman would be, not Communism, but De Gaulle. If De Gaulle
failed to bring order, military strength, and economic recovery, the only remaining
alternative would be Communism. On this basis De Gaulle would demand not only
greatly increased economic support, but also US aid in French rearmament and a firm
military alliance.

13. THe Unirep Kincpom.

Official and popular opinion in Great Britain would be profoundly shocked by the
loss of Greece and the consequent danger to traditional British interests in the Eastern
Mediterranean and Middle East. The prestige of the US, the Labor Government, and
the Foreign Minister alike would suffer. There would, however, be no reversal of
present British policy. Rather the British reaction would consist of urgent efforts to
control the damage, both directly and by pressing the US for more effective implemen-
tation of the “Truman Doctrine.” These efforts would include an endeavor to revi-
talize combined strategic planning, as during the war, and to commit the US to a
definite program of combined strategic counteraction.

On its own account the UK would suspend redeployment and demobilization, re-
inforce the Eastern Mediterranean, intensify its efforts to reach satisfactory military
agreements with the Arab States and press more vigorously for the formation of a
Western Bloc in Europe.

At the same time the UK would urge upon the United States the combined develop-
ment of a strategic position along the southern littoral of the Eastern Mediterranean, a
reconsideration of the Palestine problem, and the provision of requisite economic, moral,
and military support for the threatened countries of Europe and the Near and Middle
East.

In consequence of the UK’s already acute dollar crisis, the impaired prospects of
the European Recovery Program, and the emergency measures envisaged, the UK
itself would require additional US financial and economic assistance.
Page-8
sofeer
14. Germany.

Soviet propaganda would make extraordinary efforts to convince the Germans that
US interest in Germany was ephemeral and that the future of the country lay in |
collaboration with the USSR. It is unlikely, however, that this propaganda would have
serious effect so long as the US stood firm in Germany. Many Germans might well be
confirmed in the supposition that now surely the US must make heavy contributions
toward restoring, perhaps even rearming, western Germany in anticipation of war.
Western German political leaders would actively seek to exploit the situation to obtain
that result,

15. EvszWHERE IN WESTERN EUROPE.

Peoples and governments would be highly alarmed, but generally disposed to await
further developments. Belgium and the Netherlands might take the occasion to seek
of the US greater economic assistance and military guarantees. On the other hand,
the Scandinavian countries and Switzerland would be all the more wary of becoming
committed to a Western Bloc. Austria might be influenced to seek an accommodation
with the USSR. Franco would endeavor to exploit the situation to get Spain out of
political isolation into military alliance with the US, hoping also to obtain important
US economic assistance.

ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
16. MuppLe East Or,

From the economic point of view, the most serious consequence of the fall of
Greece would be the possible loss of the petroleum resources of the Middle East (com-
prising 40 percent of proven world reserves) through political repercussions in Iran
and the Arab States (see paragraphs 8-10). The USSR would derive little immediate
benefit from control of the oil fields of Iran and Iraq (comprising 18 percent of proven
world reserves), inasmuch as means of delivery of oil therefrom to the Soviet Union
would be lacking in the circumstances envisaged. Denial of this oil to the Western
Powers, however, would have drastic effect on both their strategic capabilities in the
region and the economy of Western Europe. With the construction and operation of
a pipe line to the Mediterranean impossible, the compensatory effectiveness of increased
production in Saudi Arabia, Bahrein, and Kuwait would be limited by the availability
of tankers for shipments via the Persian Gulf. The deficiency in the provision of oil
supplies to Western Europe would have to be made up principally by shipments from
the Caribbean, also limited by the availability of tanker tonnage. This increased drain
on the oil reserves of the Western Hemisphere, if long continued, could make the US
liquid-fuel position precarious in the event of war. Eventual loss of the petroleum
resources of Saudi Arabia, Bahrein, and Kuwait would put in question the adequacy of
the resources remaining available to the Western Powers to meet their future needs,
even in time of peace.

17. Orxer Commopitiss.

With respect to other commodities the USSR would gain no great benefit, nor
would the US and Western Europe suffer any great loss, from Soviet control of Greece,
Italy, or Iran. None of the foodstuffs or metallic ores exported from those countries is

6 SEQRET
Page-9
fe

of strategic significance to the US or Western Europe. "In fact, Greece and Italy are
liabilities in terms of food supply, fertilizers, and chemicals: the elimination of those
countries from consideration would permit increased supply to others.

18. InpustRiax Capacrry.

Italy is the only country considered likely to fall under Communist control which
has any significant industrial capacity. Utilization of Italian industry requires heavy
Provision of oil, coal, and important raw materials, which the USSR, however, could
make available. Selective employment of this capacity, particularly of the mechanical
skills and plant facilities of the machinery industry of northern Italy, would be very
advantageous to the USSR. The Balkan Satellite States, moreover, are dependent on
supplies of Italian manufactured goods. The US and Western Europe are not.

19. MerRcuaNT SHIPPING.

The Greek and Italian merchant fleets are each comparable in tonnage to that of
the USSR. Communist “capture” of these fleets intact would be of great advantage to
the USSR. Soviet economic development is presently handicapped by lack of shipping,
especially in the Black Sea.

20. Tue EUROPEAN RECOVERY PROGRAM.

The Program would be little affected by the loss of Greece, per se, but would suffer
severe adverse effects from the psychological and political repercussions of that event,
with particular reference to (a) the resulting loss of essential confidence, (b) the
tendency of the Western European community to disintegrate, and (c) the Possible
loss of essential oil supplies.
Page-10
softer

ENCLOSURE “A”

STATEMENT OF THE INTELLIGENCE ORGANIZATION
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

In the opinion of the Research and Intelligence Organization of the Department
of State the assumption that the United States would take no specific counteraction in
the event that the “Markos Government” gained control of Greece furnishes, if unquali-
fied, no feasible basis for a sound analysis of the consequences of such control. The
Intelligence Organization is therefore compelled to forego comment in detail on ORE-69
and to disassociate itself from the paper.

8 cos
Page-11
suger
ENCLOSURE “B"

DISSENT OF THE OFFICE OF NAVAL INTELLIGENCE, NAVY DEPARTMENT

The Office of Naval Intelligence does not concur in this paper for the following
reasons:

a. ONI does not consider it feasible to compound the lack of realism of the
assumption (see p. 2, par. 2) with a detailed forecast of events to happen over a wide
portion of the earth. ONT believes that the consequences of the fall of Greece to
Markos cannot be detailed accurately beyond the following statement:

“If the Communists took over Greece, it would be cited as an example of the
futility of US policy to check the advance of Communism and would have at profound
influence on the political orientation of other countries in Europe and the Near East.
Greece is the keystone, in both a political and a military sense, in the whole anti-
Communist circle.”

b. The conclusions are not examined with reference to time giving the impres-
sion that these events are inevitable and will occur forthwith.

c. Par. 4. It is doubted that the psychological and political repercussions
would be so disastrous as to bring on international panic.

d. Par. 6. Iran and Kurdish area of Iraq could possibly fall under Soviet
domination but not necessarily as a result of Communist control in Greece.

Turkey has always been realistic; she could under these circumstances orient
toward USSR.

e. Par. 7. ONI is not prepared to say without qualification that Italy would
go Communist within a few months, or that DeGaulle would come to power immediately.
Page-12
DISTRIBUTION

The President

Secretary of State

Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief

Secretary of Defense

Secretary of the Army

Secretary of the Navy

Secretary of the Air Force

Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Chairman, National Security Resources Board

Chief of Staff, US Army

Chief of Naval Operations

Chief of Staff, US Air Force

Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, US Army
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations)

Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force

Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Research and Intelligence
Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army

Chief of Naval Intelligence

Director of Intelligence, US Air Force

Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group

Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission
Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission
Chier, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State
Page-13
0. 8, GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICH.
21458-1948,