
Page-1
257 : copy wo. ah
wer IP -2 : . FOR. THE PRESIDENT.
: OF THE UNITED

Published August 2, 1948 :

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Harrys: “Trunén ibrary
Papers of Harry S. Truman

President's Secretary$s Fil
Witbier Sewusite  Coaunaind
Page-2
Ee eee

   

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

designated on the front cover and of individuals under the the furiediction of the secpoate
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further

dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-_ _
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

bd. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army __
¢. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Alr Force

e. Director of Security and. d Intelligence, . AEC, , for | the the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

J. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
g. Assistant Director for Collection a Dea, CIA, for-any other

 

 

    
 

2, This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with _.
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligeiice Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA,

DISTRIBUTION:
Office of the President -
National Security Council ___ wo ee
National Security Resources Board woe
Department of State

Department of Defense ~ ve
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy -
Department of the Ale Force —— -
State-Army-Navy-Alr Force Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Atomic Energy Commission
Page-3
‘of the plan, had not only been too ambitious but was also Ampossible of realization

 

ORE 53-48

POSTWAR INDUSTRIAL RECOVERY IN FRANCE

SUMMARY

fully the demands for consumers’ goods until the basic industrial goals had been at
tained.

By the end of 1947, however, 2 attainment of the ne original annual 1 goals we was as beginnl
to fall dangerously in arteats hecatise of él

ination of factors Seriously « y aggravated
y inflation. A new Government, realizing that the investment f program, the heart

plan emphasized tt the | production of“ Capital goods, deterring ar any- te 188

      

 

 

in a period of monetary instability, reduced the investment goals and put through a _ !
series of bold anti-inflationary measures. !

By April 1948, largely as
solved, was temt temporarily haltec
117 percent of 1938, An outstanding achievement was t! was
neck, which in turn has permitted a rapid increase in steel production. Production in
the other industries considered basic to France’s plan for industrial recovery has like-_
wise increased.

The ECA, meanwhile, by assuring a steadily increasing volume_of goods available
in France and by improving the Government's budgetary. position, will help Solve
France's basic prowtem of inflation.” The Government will have difficulty in stabilizing
prices and wages during critical pre-harvest months, but its chances for ultimate suc- ~~
cess are enhanced by increasing domestic industrial output and the prospects of a
bumper crop.

Aside from this immediate task, however, the Government will continue to be ~~~
faced with the problems of harmonizing its varlous modernization and expansion
programs, of improving standards of living without allowing consumption expenditure
to expand too rapidly, and of increasing exports, all with its still limited resources.

 

   
 

 

 

 
 

 

    

 

 

Note: The Information in this report is as of 23 June 1946. —
‘The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Alr Force
have concurred In this report.
Page-4
POSTWAR INDUSTRIAL RECOVERY IN_ FRANCE

The basis for French economic planning since 1946 has been the Monnet Plan,
designed to replace capital equipment consumed during the depression of the 1930's,
the war, and the occupation of the early 40’s, and to modernize and expand the existing
industrial and agricultural equipment. The plan contemplated the achievement: ——~
by 1950 of an over-all Jevel of industrial output 60 percent above that of 1938, or 25
percent above that of 1929, the peak year of French industrial production.

The general objectives were derived from the annual goals set up for the years. __
1947 through 1950 for the six basic industries: coal, power, steel, cement, agricultural
machinery, and transport. _ Production goals for other industries and for agriculture
were outlined with less detail, being primarily designed to indicate the relative rate
of growth desired so that allocations of scarce materials, manpower, and forelgn €
change could be made with the optimum effect on the whole economy, ~~ _

The plan placed the emphasis on production of capital goods in order. to. permit
modernization and reconstruction of the French economy while reducing dependence —
on foreign supplies of capital equipment. Not until after the attainment of. these
goals would it have been possible to attempt to satisfy fully the demand for consumers’
goods. Furthermore, because prewar agricultural production was fairly adequate, an
increase of only 15 percent over 1938 in output by 1950 leemed necessary-—this
increase to be effected mainly through expanded use of agricultural machinery, ___

The Monnet Plan tatgets for 1947, however, proved to be more ambitious than __
could be realized within the original timetable. Production did not recover to 1938
levels until mid-1947 though originally it had been expected that these would be at-_
tained by the end of 1946. The crop failure of 1947 and the resultant depletion of the
French food supply; the acceleration of inflationary pressures with their adverse effects
upon labor and the whole economy; unexpected shortages of power caused by the
drought; continued coal shortages and consequent restriction of steel production; the
critical foreign exchange position; and the November-December strikes; all widened _ _
the gap by which France missed the target.

‘The investment program, the real heart of the Monnet Plan, had been deemed both
necessary and sufficient to increase the prod abor in order to achieve the
planned levels of output, simultaneously reducing production costs so that French ~~
products could compete in both the domestic and world markets. The plan had
originally called for a rate of total investment (including housing) in 1947 equal to”
approximately 20 percent of the total annual national income, This fs en extremely
high rate at any time, but especially so when national income and consumption are
depressed. The so-called “Balance-Shect Commission”, headed by Jcatt Monnet, origi-
nator of the plan, realized from the experience of the year that as long as monetary
stabilization was not a fact, iL was futile to count on voluntary savings to provide ade-
quate funds for the investment program. Although no general Te-lssuing of the Plan
or adjustment of the individual Industrial goals have been made, the entire recon-
Page-5
rey

 

jecemapetlae eee pnm et Hm ee

 

 

struction and investment expenditure goals underwent intensive screening at the end

0f 1947. Reconstruction goals have been reduced by 11 percent compared to 1947, and

the various investment programs have been cut by 22 to 40 percent. Without attempt-
“ing to predict the industrial increase that would be realized in specific sectors in 1948,

it was estimated both in France and the US that French industrial Production would ~~
-tise during the year to a general level of 10 percent above the 1938 figure. The French
Balance-Sheet Commission arrived at roughly the same conclusions, It appeared,
furthermore, that instead of attaining a level 60 percent higher by 1950, industrial
output would probably not rise higher than 40 percent by 1952.

Without US Interim Aid during the past fall and winter and without the current
ECA allocations, economic recovery in France would have been even more serfously
retarded. Even with US funds, however, little improvement in the general economic -
situation could have been accomplished without the series of strong anti-inflationary
measures undertaken by.the Schuman Government, after it camé to power in Novem-
ber 1947, In March 1948, for the first time in ten months, prices did not rise but
declined slightly. Although these measures have not eliminated all basic causes of
inflation, the present government had, all in all, courageously tackled the fundamental
problem pointed out by Monnet’s group-namely, the excess of total demand on the _
part of the State, business, and consumers for the available resources at existing prices, __

During the first few months of 1948, owing in large part to an absence of labor
strife and to an uncommonly mild winter, production in the six industries considered
basic to the Monnet Plan began to show a significant increase. ! Domestic coal pro-  _
duction at the end of April stood at a rate surpassing the original goal for 1948. The
coal bottleneck has been broken; increasing home production and availability of forelgn
coal (US and Ruhr) have permitted an increased allotment to the steel industry. ‘This
boost to steel producers was an important factor in the rise of the over-all industrial
Production level in April to 117 percent of 1938—or already 7 percent higher than the
revised Monnet Plan estimate for 1948. The present rate of steel production is 7.7
million tons (crude steel) annually, and the rate may reach 8.5 million by autumn.
The shortage of coke, which exists despite the generally satisfactory coal situation,
however, will along with other factors, prevent the attainment of the original Monnet _
Plan goal of 9 million tons for 1948. Goals for the production of hydroelectric power
are currently being met at a rate approximately 55 percent above the 1938 level. Total
freight ton-kilometers performed by the French. Tallways in 1947 were estimated to be
44,000 millions. This was 25 percent higher than the figure for 1937, The French
estimate, which may be somewhat over-optimistic, is that the 1948 figure will be 17
percent higher than that of 1947. In any case, more and more freight Is belng moved
by truck and the inland canal system is functioning ‘Satisfactorily. Although there
may be difficulties in the next few months when the transportation system will have ot
to carry the burden of the expected good harvest, there probably will be no transporta-
tion bottleneck.

‘The production of cement in 1947 rose well above the 1938 level, but owing In
Part to the strikes of November-December the level reached was only 3.8 million tons

SER TRI
Page-6
aN a

 
  

gE:

as against a goal of 6 million. In March 1948, coment was being produced at a rate

_ of 5 million tons annually, Whether the original Monnet Plan target of 8 million tons

in 1948 will be reached depends largely on how much steel and coal can be allocated
to this industry.

The production of agricultural machinery, the sixth “basic industry”, fell miser-

_ ably short of the goal in 1947. Only some 5,000 agricultural tractors were produced,

for example, bs against an objective of over 12,000, In January 1948, however, pro- —-—-
duction was already approaching an annual rate of 10,000.-- Realizing the importance
of making France relatively self-sufficient in food production as soon as possible, the —~ ~

Government is making the allocation of steel to this industry a matter of priority, i

The $375 million program; which is France’s share of ECA for the period Ap!
July 1948, has already enabled the Government to raise the bread ration, thereby
creasing the present urban French diet by 150 calories dally.~ After. the wheat
harvest, it is probable that the ration will be further increased. Although total dollar. __
imports show a current decrease from the 1947 level ia some particular Aelds(for in-_
Stance, vehicles and metals, where French production increased or requirements de-

creased) it is now estimated that the program will allow France sufficient coal and

  

 

 

 

raw materials at least to maintain its present industrial level of 117 percent of 1938 ——

(already 11 percent higher than the peak attained in 1947), Consumption of coal,
steel, and cotton fabric will increase over that of 1947 by 15 percent, 30 percent, and
19 percent respectively. - The ECA program will be the major element in financing a
dollar deficit only a little smaller than that which existed In 1947. Over half the
April-July 1948 dollar payments Of $651 million will be financed by ECA ald. Normal.
current French dollar receipts will finance $120 million, or only 1/5 of the dollar
payments. The remaining dollar deficit will be financed bye existing French gold and
dollars reserves, and dollar credits from ECA. —

The ECA, therefore, by increasing the quantity of goods available in France and —
by improving the Government’s budgetary position, will help solve France’s basic __
problem of inflation.” Wncreasing domestic. French industrial output and_the pros-
pects of a good harvest enhance the chances for ultimate success provided the Govern-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ment succeeds in holding prices back during the critical pre-harvest months,

Aside from this immediate task, however, the Government will continue to be
faced with the problems of harmonizing its concurrent aims of industrial moderni-_
zation and expansion, of improving standards of living, a1 and of increasing exports all
with its still limited resources. —

If renewed infiationary price rises are to be prevented, consumption éxpenditure
cannot be permitted to expand rapidly. Current expenditures of the State, further-
more, should not encroach upon the Monnet Plan’s requirements for investment of
government revenue and private savings; on the contrary, & surplus fn the ordinary
budget will have to be effected as soon as practicable. The entire investment and
modernization programs must continually be screened to assure both thelr essentiality
and the rapidity with which they yield an increased flow of goods and services.
Page-7
Private credit and savings must continue to be placed at the service of the national
investment program, This program, to be successful, will have to be Umited to
those sums which can be ralsed through private savings, the possible surplus In the
ordinary budget, and that portion of local currency—as yet not determined—which
will be set aside as counterpart of ECA assistance.

Eas,

TE a 4
