
Page-1
SNIE 70-66
2 June 1966

  

SPECIAL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 70.66

Probable Repercussions of the ~

South-West Africa Issue |.

 

Submitted by
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf
2 JUNE 1966

, Authenticated:
: IVE SECRETARY, Us(8
Page-2
\
|
|
!
|
i

P|

| |

\ {

t i

I i

i | i
The following intelligence organizations Participated i in the preparation of
this estimate:
The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
| ments of State, Defense and the NSA.
Concurring:
Dr. R. J. Smith, for Deputy Director of Ceriral Intelligence
‘ Me. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of
' State ! i
| : Lieutenant General Joseph F. Carroll, USAF, Director, Defense intelligence Agency
Lieutenant General Marshall S. Carter, USA, Director of the National Security

t 7 i
| i : Agency |
i

‘Abstaining:

| Me. Howard C. Brown, Jr., Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Commission
| : and Mr. William ©. Cregar, for Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investi-

" gation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.
i
|

 

 

: 1
io '
‘ ; | WARNING
This material contains information affecting ‘the Notional Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

1 {
I i i
: 1

i

|
fy
por |

 

:

 

i
GROUP 1

: Excluded from autemotte

i ‘downgrading and

declessifieation

 

 

 

 

an
q
Page-3
PROBABLE REPERCUSSIONS OF
THE SOUTH-WEST AFRICA ISSUE

 
 

f 1 1

   

/CONCLUSIONS
| A. The International Court of Justice (ICJ) will soon render its

' decision on the case brought against South Africa conceming its man- . -
' date over South-West Africa (SWA). Irrespective of the terms of ~
‘the decision, we expect the black Africans and their sympathizers
to take the occasion to press the UN to end apartheid in SWA and
‘eventually in South Africa itself. They will put particular pressure
jon the US and UK who, they believe, could bring South Africa to
terms if they really tried. (Paras, 1, 8-9, 20)

, .B. South Africa, in order to improve its legal and political position,
"might comply with provisions of the judgment which did not dilute
| its control over SWA. South Africa is highly unlikely to give in to
' pressure for further steps and its opponents will probably seek strong
: UN action. Although the UK could ill afford to join full economic

" ‘sanctions, it may not veto Security Council action and no other per-

‘ manent member may do so. : If, as is likely, economic sanctions were
: ineffective, the matter of military sanctions would arise, though suffi-
cient support in the UN for such sanctions is highly unlikely. We
. do not believe that the South Africans would capitulate in the face of
j economic sanctions or the threat of military sanctions.’ (Paras. 15-19)

; C. The African states will portray firm US action against South

| Africa as the touchstone of US relations and influence in Africa. If the
UN does not force South Africa to retreat, the Africans and their
' sympathizers will keep the issue alive, in the UN and out, and it will
! trouble Africa’s relations with the West. (Paras, 20-22)

: * Mr, Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
* dissents from the estimates in the last two sentences of this paragraph, because he believes
that they depend significantly on a US policy decisions. Cf. his footnotes to paragraphs

 

y 18 and 19,
Page-4
Di i
1, INTRODUCTION ! |
1.'The International Court of Justice (ICJ) is expected soon to deliver a
decision on a coriplaint brought by Liberia and Ethiopia alleging that South
Africa has violated the mandate granted to it over South-West Africa (SWA)
by the League of Nations (see Annex). Although the Court's decision is likely
to reaffirm that South Africa is still bound by the mandate and that the UN
is the successor to the League's supervisory responsibilities for SWA, it is likely
to be vague on South Africa’s other obligations. It may hold that apartheid
is inconsistent with the mandate.; Whatever the decision, it will give the
Africans and others who strongly oppose apartheid the opportunity to try to
involve the UN deeply in South African affairs. Their objective will probably
be to revoke South Africa’s mandate in SWA, and eventually to force South
Africa to abandon apartheid and Political discrimination in South Africa itself.
rds A !
yt : i I
I. BACKGROUND AND CURRENT POLITICAL SETTING

A. South-West Africa | ‘

2.; South-West Africa seems an unlikely arena for, high international stakes.
Approximately one-half million nonwhites are scattered over a largely arid
expanse of some 317,000 square miles. Most live in the tribal reserves in the
north where they eke out an existence. There are,'in addition, about 85,000
whites, of whom about 70 percent are Afrikaners * and slightly over 20 percent
are of German descent. All the whites live in the “Police Zone”* which com-
prises the larger, southern purt of the mandate. Most of the approximately
75,000 wage-earning Africans, chiefly from the northern reserves, also work in
the Police Zone as contract laborers. The African tribal reserves are controlled
directly from Pretoria. The white electorate has ten seats in the South African
Parliament, and so elects a SWA Legislative Assembly with limited powers.
In most respects the territory is governed as an integral part of South Africa.
Despite participation in South African and local elections there is little political
activity among the whites. Such political activity as exists among the tribally
divided ‘Africans is conducted largely outside SWA by two small exile groups
whose headquarters are in Dar-es-Salaam. |

& The modern sector of the economy is based on mining, fishing, and agri-
cultural enterprises. The first two are dominated by South African and foreign
interests, agriculture is dominated by the resident whites. Growing amounts

: | :

* Afrikaner is the term applied to white Afrikaans-speaking South Africans, principally de-
scendants of Dutch (Boer) settlers, =; yi :

* Black reserves in the Police Zone (see map) are strictly controlled by white officials and
Banta councils or headmen have no power whereas the northern areas are ruled indirectly
through Bantu chiefs or councils. i .

2

!
{
!

i
i
i
|
Page-5
of diamonds, cadmium, and other minerals are exported and SWA earns large
amounts of foreign exchange. The modern economy is currently booming,
partly because of large South African government expenditures on housing,
hospital, and other projects and for purchases of white owned farms on which
to resettle Africans. The South African government is also spending substantial
sums on the improvement or construction of airfields and paved roads,

B. South African Views : :

4. In South Africa, the present political atmosphere appears to be one of great
determination, and even a little truculence. : Prime Minister Verwoerd is fresh
from a decisive election victory which gave his National Party an overwhelming
majority in the Parliament. For the first time, Verwoerd was able to go beyond
his Afrikaner power base and secure significant support from the English-
speaking community. Verwoerd’s cautious handling of the Rhodesian and other
issues has appeared to many voters as sound and in the national interest. i

ite uneasiness in some quarters over the consequences of the Rhodesian

: and SWA problems, South Africans are more united on racial policy than they

have been in the past and appear less concerned over world opinion. The
country is steadily emerging from the effects of a sustainvd and punishing
drought; inflationary pressures, which at one time seemed to threaten South
Africa's vigorous economic growth, have been contained.

* 5, In the last year or so Verwoerd has become increasingly assertive in stating

South Africa’s intention to hold on to the territory. Prior to 1965 there was
no clear expression of South African policy although, following the recommenda-
tions of the controversial Odendaal Report (1964), substantial sums are being
spent for road, water, and agricultural Projects in areas which that report desig-
nated as prospective “Bantustans.” But in a contentious speech last year,
Verwoerd said that South Africa “will be compelied to fight to the death to
see that SWA does not fall into Communist hands,” and made it clear that he
regarded a UN presence as an equivalent. danger. And last March 15, in
Windhoek, Verwoerd claimed that the fortunes of the Republic and SWA are
“indissolubly woven together.” Although these were campaign speeches, Ver-
woerd sounded the same note in private exchanges.

_ 8. Moreover, subsequent statements in similar vein by important South African
officials, combined with the extensive construction underway in the territory,
some of it tailored to military usage, strongly suggest that Verwoerd plans to
stay in SWA. One fact is plain: the overwhelming majority of white South
Africans are prepared to follow the Prime Minister’s lead on policy toward the
mandate, Thus supported, Verwoerd saw fit in April to lecture the US and
the UK about the hazards of being drawn into “imprudent action” over the
South-West Africa (or Rhodesian) issues.

7. We think that Verwoerd has become persuaded, or chooses to believe, that
SWA’s empty reaches are vital to South Arica’s security. By and large, white
South Africans view political difficulties in Black Africa as inevitable. The

‘Ss 3
Page-6
go's chaos made a deep impression on many, and it suits them to keep black
rule as distant as possible. Consequently, SWA is valued as a strategic extension
of ihe “Fatherland.” The South African government fears that any yielding
to African or UN pressures on SWA would make it more difficult to resist
pressures on South Africa itself. :

C. African Views : Dy

8. Although political leaders in independent Black Africa continue to call
for an end to white supremacy in southern Africa, they are embarrassed and
frustrated at their lack of power to do anything but talk. Among the radicals,
Nkrumal’s fall and Toure’s troubles have dramatized the weakness of Africa’s
“militants.” Even the more impatient are acutely aware that Africa must still
rely on non-African instrumentalities and nations to gain its political goals in
southern Africa. Africans of all political hues are frustrated by their inability
to topple Ian Smith in Rhodesia (or to get some one else to do it) and by their
failure to force South Africa to modify in the slightest its racial policies.

9. Although the Africans hope eventually to see SWA emerge as an inde-
pendent state, in the present circumstances the issue serves chiefly as an oppor-
tunity to place South Africa in the international dock, putting pressure on South »
Africa at one of its few vulnerable points. The Africans, having endured the.
long drawn out legal procedures of the ICJ, will insist that the US and the UK
must take vigorous action against South Africe in: support of the UN. The
Africans hope for a political decision in the UN which will revoke South Africa's
mandate. They also intend to exploit the situation against South Africa for its
practice of apartheid at home, an issue which has been already before the UN

for many years.

|

Ill. US AND UK POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SECURITY INTERESTS

10. Although there are some US and UK mining investments in SWA, these
are minor compared to US and UK economic and security interests in South
Africa itself. The UK investment in South Africa is about $3 billion and the
UK's net earnings on current account with South Africa are over $500 million
ayear. The balance of payments difficulties which the British are experiencing
thus make economic relations with South Africa of major importance. The con-
tinued flow of South African gold to the Free World (70 percent of annual Free
World production) is important to its arrangements for international payments
based on sterling and the dollar. Britain is also concerned with the interests
of over one million English-speaking South Africans. Insofar as security is
concerned, the British contend that the use of Simonstown naval base is im-
portant to them, and they are also largely dependent on South African goodwill
for access to the former High Commission Territories (Bechuanaland, Basuto-
land, and Swaziland), which are aimost wholly dependent on the South African
Page-7
j

 

these considerations, the UK must weigh its relations with the multiracial Com-
monwealth and British trade and investment with the rest of Africa. For
Part, South Africa regards Briti

 

11. US commercial ties to South Africa are, also important, though not crucial,

In 1965 US exports were $438 million and the US net earnings from South Africa

, 00 Current account exceeded $300 million. US investment amounts to approxi-

, mately $650 million. The US also imports substantial quantities of strategic

and other minerals, e.g., platinum. US security interests include tracking sta-
tions, access to airfields, and port fueling facilities for US ships.

IV. PROBABLE REPERCUSSIONS OF THE ICJ DECISION

| A. The United Nations Organization

12. The SWA issue will be a cruel test of the UN. Should it prove unable to _:
, take substantive action in the case, the organization will receive a damaging °
blow. On the other hand, a decision to take action, e.g., mandatory sanctions
against South Africa, could also seriously damage the UN if they were not fully
imposed or were otherwise not effective. / :

13. The Court in its decision will almost certainly find fault with South
Africa’s administration of its mandate. The decision will probably be vague
| or ambiguous in some respects, however, and the Court will probably ‘leave to
the UN the problem of applying the decision in detail. Irrespective of the exact
terms of the ICJ decision, the judgment will provide the African states with a
starting point for a stepped-up political ‘and Propaganda campaign against
South Africa and the apartheid concept.’ A legal slap on the wrist by the
Court would be condemned by the Africans, while a strongly critical judgment
would be taken as a point of departure for strong action. But either way, the
issue will be quickly jomed. | ;
| ‘14 In the first instance, many of the Africans and their sympathizers will
probably prefer that the matter be handled in the General Assembly since in
’ that forum they have a much greater voting weight. Irrespective of where the
initial moves are made, however, the matter will eventually come to the Security
Council which alone has enforcement powers under the UN Charter. In either
' forum, some will prefer drastic immediate action to force the end of apartheid
in SWA, e.g, revocation cf the; mandate, the application of sanctions. Others
will igure that a more gradual «:vlication of Pressures on South Africa will have
a greater chance of bringin: the Western powers along with them. Sooner or
later, however, the Security Council will be faced by a strong demand to force
South Africa to comply. !

1S. Verwoerd is normally a carefu. volitician, and he will probably play a
cool hand, neither rejecting the Court's decision abruptly nor moving, as some

' have suggested, to annex SWA. Initially, the South Africans will probably
play for time, in the hope that UN action can become bogged down in legal

5
Page-8
| i |
oe 1 |
and ‘procedural difficulties. Although reluctant to alienate the US and the
UK, South Africa will be stubborn in defense of what it regards as matters
of principle and national security. : i
| 16 South Africa will probably hope to avoid rejecting all the provisions of
the judgment. To the extent that it complied, ‘it would strengthen its legal
case against the Africans and others who, we believe, will press the UN to go
beyond the strict terms of the judgment and it might gain some tolerance, if not

from other UN members. To this end, South Africa might, if the

judgment so orders, agree to make revorts to the UN, transmit petitions from
inhabitants, or carry out other provisions which did not alter its control of
SWA. South Africa would probably, in any event, make some gestures of
compliance or enter into discussions of compliance in an effort to limit and
postpone as long as possible any further UN action.
’ 17. We think it unlikely that any actions taken by South Africa will satisfy
the Africans. We believe there would be demands in the UN for strong and
specific measures against South Africa, eg., all-out diplomatic and economic
sanctions. In view of the actions already taken by the Security Council against
Southern Rhodesia, the Africans are doubtless encouraged to believe that sanc-
tions can be invoked against Pretoria. Verwoerd would hope to avoid them,
however, through a veto by the UK or France (we think that the UK might ~
‘abstain and that France might either abstain or veto). The status of the
|Rhodesian question at the time would probably have a good deal of bearing
jon the UN's handling of the SWA issue, and the Africans might seek to link
both problems in an effort to maximize pressures on Verwoerd.
boa : : i
B. South Africa . ' : |
i ‘18. Should the UN impose economic sanctions, we do not think Verwoerd
‘would scuttle and run (if he did, this would create a new set of problems since
Hit would require a sizable international effort to administer the territory). But
| there is a good chance that he would take South Africa out of the United Nations,
land any remaining chance that he would support sanctions against Rhodesia
would. disappear.* i :
| 19, Indeed, we do not think that South Africa would relinquish control of
|SWA even if the UN later decided to impose across-the-board mandatory
{economic sanctions under a Chapter VII (threat to international peace) resolu-
j Hon. Especially if supported by South Africa’s major trading partners, these
; measures would create misgivings among many in South Africa. However,
‘ such economic sanctions, even if applied over a period of two or three years,
, would be unlikely to have a critical effect on South Africa's economy, partly

  

 

| ‘Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
j believes that if South Africa were confronted by a highly unfavorable ruling of the ICJ and
| a credible threat of enforcement by major powers, including the US, Pretoria might consent
| to a substantial modification of {ts control over SWA or, conceivably, even withdraw from
i SWA altogether. . i |

4
i , 6)
Page-9
: SI

‘ ‘ i

‘because it is increasingly self-sufficient and partly because of the extreme diffi-
ieulty in enforcing air-tight sanctions, Furthermore, the UK has compelling
national reasons against participation in economic sanctions. The Organization
‘of African Unity (OAU) and Bantu nationalist organizations are unlikely to
be'able to arouse such internal trouble as to affect the South African economy.
In the event that economic sanctio..< proved inadequate, the question of apply-
ing military sanctions would arise. We believe that it would be highly unlikely
that the necessary support for the latter form of sanctions would be found in
the UN. However, in the remote event of a threat of military confrontation
with the UN, backed by the UK and the US, we believe that South Africa
would interpret the situation as a threat to the security of South Africa itself
and would refuse: to capitulate.* :

20. The Black African states believe that the UK and the US can bend
South Africa to their will on the SWA issue if they choose to do so. Pressure
will be put on the US to apply the principles which it has traditionally enunci-
ated including self-determination for peoples, the rule of law, support of the
UN and opposition to apartheid. | A number will seek to exert pressure on the
UK and the US through other pending and often unrelated issues both in and
out of the UN such as the juestion of Chinese representation. Some may also
threaten diplomatic ruptures and denial of facilities. ‘These pressures are likely
to be supported by both arranged and spontaneous demonstrations against US

tions and some incidents involving US personnel, Therefore, unless the

US and the West back what the Africans regard as sufficiently strong measures,

relations with Black Africa are certain to suffer a decline, The West will con-

tinue, however, to maintain an important presence in Africa, even in those

countries most deeply concerned in the status of SWA, and Africans will con-

tinue to depend on the West as the market for virtually all their exports and
the main source of economic, technical, and other assistance.

| \

C. The Communist Powers |

| 21. The West's embarrassment will provide tempting propaganda opportunities
for the Communists. At the UN, they will be likely to champion independence
for SWA, and probably will urge mandatory. sanctions against South Africa.
‘They may step up training and material support for “liberation groups” from

"Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
believes that this judgment must involve an assumption regarding US policy. If it is assumed
that the US will not support UN military measures in the SWA case, then the estimate in
this sentence is probably correct. If the US were to support such measures, it is somewhat
more likely that the necessary support for them would be forthcoming in the UN.

*Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
believes that the South African reaction to a threatened military confrontation with the UN
would depend on the credibility of the threat. The situation described is a highly speculative
one. But if South Africa were faced by a credible threat of UN military action (e.g., a naval
blockade), backed by the US and directed solely toward enforcing UN decisions on SWA,
there is at least an even chance that Pretoria would seek an accommodation rather than “refuse
to capitulate.” !
ti
Page-10
southern Africa. However, both Moscow and Peiping are handicapped by the
- fact there is no active insurgency in either SWA or South Africa. Moreover,
given its setbacks elsewhere in Africa, and its extremely cautiors approach to
_ the Rhodesian problem, the USSR is likely to move slowly, if at all, toward

direct involvement in SWA. Specifically, we think the USSR would be dubious
. about joining any UN military action against faraway South Africa.

: v. THE LONGER TERM OUTLOOK

_ “| 2% Should South Africa successfully defy the UN and the ICJ, there will be
‘a very considerable and highly vocal reaction. . There will be, for example,
splenetic outbursts against the West in the UN and elsewhere. Anti-Western
' forces in the underdeveloped areas will also receive an assist, and racial relations
| in Africa will be set back. Nor is the SWA issue likely to disappear. For the
; Africans, it will remain as a focal point for mobilizing pressures on South Africa.
| For one thing, it involves issues affecting the authority of the UN itself on which
: the Africans can win support from countries which might otherwise be reluctant
to support UN action against apartheid in South Africa itself. They will prob-
ably: link it with other unresolved southern Africa issues. Therefore, even
though African pressures are unsuccessful in the short run, the Africans and
others will continue to press strongly for UN action to compel South Africa to
give.up SWA and to abandon apartheid in South Africa itself. :
Page-11
: ANNEX

"BACKGROUND OF THE SOUTH-WEST AFRICA CASE BEFORE THE
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (ICJ)

: _1, South Africa was designated as mandatory power for South-West Africa
(SWA) by the League of Nations in 1920, Following World War II, the
South African Government refused to place SWA under the UN Trusteeship
Sys*-m, though all other mandatory powers accepted UN Trusteeship arrange-
ments. The UN in 1950 requested the ICJ for an advisory opinion on the status
of SWA. In substance, the IC] advised that South Africa had no legal obligation
to place the territory under the Trusteeship System, but remained subject to
‘the obligations set forth in the original mandate in administering the area. The
Covrt also decided that the UN General Assembly was 1. .al'y competent to
exercise the League of Nations’ supervisory functions with respect to territorial
_ administration. Further, the Court held that South Africa could not modify
the international status of the territory without consent cf she UN. ‘

2 South Africa rejected those! aspects of the opinion suggesting ‘“-at it had

' Tesponsibilities to the UN and has failed to respond to General Asse . iy resolu-

tions which call upon South Africa to put SWA under trusteeship. Following

! a resolution of the Conference of Independent African States in 1960, Ethiopia

, and Liberia instituted proceedings in the ICJ against South Africa which
. resulted in the current case. | |

; % In their case, Liberia and: Ethiopia are seeking to establish four main
i points: (1) the mandate continues to exist; (2) the UN has replaced the League
-: as the supervisory authority; (3) apartheid violates the mandate which requires
| the mandatory power to “promote to the utmost the material and n, ‘ral well-
i being and social progress of the inhabitants,” and (4) the Court should declare
. that South Africa is bound to cease the Practice of apa-theid in SWA. Neither
; Feplacement of South Africa as mandatory power nor ind: _endence for the

po territory is at issue before the ICJ, since these are regarded essentially as

} political matters,

; ‘A. Pretoria’s Tesponse to the complaints about its stewardship has been typi-
 ¢ally Afrikaner: a blend of high-minded -concem for the legal aspects and a

. Tigid defense of apartheid based on their concept of the empirical situation.

. , South Africa’s legal position is that the mandate survived as an institution but
i Pretoria’s contractual obligations ended because of the dissolution of the League,
and that the mandate is no longer a “tr or convention in force” within

ET 9

i
|
fee
|
Page-12
the meaning of Article 37 of the Statute of the ICJ. South Africa has largely
applied apartheid in SWA, thus in effect placing apartheid on trial.
'.. 5,-As the foregoing suggests, the case is a legal quicksand. For example,
even though the debilitating effects of apartheid normally are manifest, in
practice it is difficult to determine whether, how, and to what degree apartheid
’ breaches the mandate. Also, a Class “C” mandate, such as the League granted
to South Africa, seems to condone “second-class citizen” treatment for the
* subjects: it permits forced labor for essential public works and services and
- prohibits the supply of intoxicating spirits and beverages to the African in-
- habitants. Nor are mandatory powers specifically enjoined to advance the
" indigenous population politically.
Page-13
SunlawoWnoge cos coro

sun ooe oo8 obr °

Aepunog eauinolg —.—

aarasa! nyueg
Pasodoid pue yuasas,

UuvIIQ,
upipuy

10
Ye. Sanday

. ‘memory é

~e, ae

toanagen * i

(ug)
aNDIEWwYZOW

: orn
_Wisagow 1 NWBHINCS

v3

(9961 ‘0 i60$ eouepuedepey
oye WIvsion _— “)
ot

 

 

GNVIVNYNHD38

 

uDadQ
onuony
yynog

«sis

Sa a we

o's) i
ym nd SAM HINOSEE ES

aro covery

»

agence
Page-14
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a oe
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments: “a

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

¢. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force ~

f. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency ie

i @. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission i

i h. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

i. Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

 

  

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
‘ applicoble security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
y y arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

 

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with [AC-D-69/2, 22
dune 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas
sified: FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation