
Page-1
SREREF

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE GROUP

PROBABLE SOVIET REACTIONS TO
A US AID PROGRAM FOR ITALY

ORE 21/1
5 August 1947

 

: c
Copy No__Y.

 

290007
Page-2
RE 21/1

 

3 AuGusT 1947 COPY NO.

PROBABLE SOVIET REACTIONS TO
A US AID PROGRAM FOR ITALY

1. The current Soviet objective with respect to Italy-is to gain even-
tual control of that country by political’ processes through the increasing
influence and power of the Italian Communist Party. To this end the Italian
Communists exploit astutely the discontent of the working class and lower
middle class resulting’ from unemployment, food shortages, the high cost of
living, and other consequences of economic dislocation. They attribute the
Government's failure to overcome these conditions to its lack of sympathy and
understanding, through lack of working class representation, and to its admin-
istrative ineptitude.

2. The Communists would perceive at once that the proposed aid program,
designed to promote genuine economic recovery and to strengthen traditional
ties between Italy and the West, would, if successful, deprive them of their
political stock in trade and tend to stabilize the political ascendancy of the
moderate parties. In consequence, the USSR and the Italian Communists must re-
gard it as imperative to defeat the program, their Problem being how to do so
without themselves incurring responsibility for disappointing the high hopes
which the program would arouse in all classes of Italian society. A campaign
of strikes, disorders, and similar direct action in obvious opposition to the
program, while within Communist capabilities, would be self-defeating in that
it would provoke such general resentment as-to destroy any prospect of an ulti-
mate Communist accession to power by political means. The subtlety required to
obstruct and discredit the aid program without seeming to oppose it is also
within the capabilities of the Communist leadership in Italy, which has proved
its astuteness in escaping from equally difficult dilemmas. It is therefore
probable that the Communists would seek to cope with the aid program by devious
rather than overt means, turning it to their ow ultimate advantage.

3. Italian Communist strategy in implementation of the foregoing concept
would be designed to create and exploit disappointment and disillusionment re-
garding the aid program, however beneficial its actual results. It would be
based on the following considerations in particular:

&. The amelioration of conditions in Italy is quite acceptable to the
Communists (who intend to take over the management of Italian affairs), pro-
vided that the moderate parties and the United States can be deprived of ‘any
credit for it and, indeed, be made objects of resentment in the process.

b.~ The depth of existing despair is such that the prospect of aid can

be made to raise extravagant hopes leading ultimately to unreasonable, but ex-
Ploitable, disappointment when the program fails to produce manna from heaven.
Page-3
f
c. Administration of the program must inevitably produce some Italo-

American friction exploitable in terms of patriotic resentment of Yankee "im-
perialism" in general and “carpetbaggers" in particular.

d. The anticipated economic collapse of the United States in 1948
would cause the collapse of the aid Program and the ultimate disillusionment.

4. The specific courses of counteraction which might be expected of the
Italian Communists are:

&. Public acceptance of the aid Program, not as an act of benevolence
on the part of the United States, but as no more (indeed, less) than Italy has
a right to expect in all the circumstances.

b. Qualification of this acceptance by reservations regarding the
protection of Italian independence and sovereignty calculated to incite sus-
picion as to the motives of the United States and to render the Italian people
hypersensitive to necessary US supervision of the program--this is to be fol-
lowed up by Soviet propaganda regarding US imperialism in Italy, Communist
vilification of US supervisory personnel and exploitation of every incident of
friction, and a general effort to substitute resentment of US "interference"
for gratitude for US assistance.

&: Attacks upon the moderate Government for accepting such "interfer-
ence" and for ineptitude and discrimination in the administration of the program.

d. Covert sabotage and labor manipulation designed to obstruct the
program and to impair its effectiveness without incurring responsibility.

@- Propaganda to promote the idea that the US contribution to Italian
recovery is actually niggardly in relation to the needs of the country and to
the benefits which might have been derived from closer association with the
mighty and generous USSR. Although, manifestly, the USSR could not compete with
an equivalent aid program, this notion could be supported by opportunistic
grants of Soviet aid in critical situations, such incidents to be exploited as
were Soviet grain shipments to France despite greater, but commonplace, US ship-
ments. .

5. By such measures, primarily propagandistic, but including the maximum
degree of covert obstruction, the Italian Communists would strive to turn the
US aid program to their own ultimate advantage. If, however, it were to become
apparent to the Kremlin that this policy of finesse was not working~-that, des-
pite Communist efforts, the aid program was strengthening substantially the
political power of the Italian moderates and consolidating the Westerri orienta-
tion of Italian policy--then Soviet-Communist tactics would be reversed. In
these circumstances the Prospects of a Communist accession to power by politi-
cal means would have disappeared, so that action prejudicial to that end would
entail no sacrifice. Every resource of the USSR and the Italian Communist Party
would then be committed in an open, all-out effort to defeat the economic as

ae ff
Page-4
sgh.

well as the political purposes of the program by strikes, sabotage, incendiar-
ism, disorders, and possibly by insurrection. Such tactics would produce such
an anti-Communist, anti-Soviet reaction in Italy as to consolidate Italian ad-
herence to the West. The economic consequences would be such, however, as to
disrupt the process of Italian rehabilitation and to render Italy an economic
liability as an ally. Moreover, in the confusion created some opportunity
might arise for a Communist accession to power by force. . -

6. In short, so long as, in the opinion of the Kremlin, there remains a
fair prospect of Communist accession to power in Italy by political means, the
USSR and the Italian Communists will seek to deal with the aid program by fi-
nesse in hope of turning it to their own advantage. If, however, that prospect
is eliminated, the USSR and the Italian Commmists will do all in their power
to disrupt the economic rehabilitation and political stabilization of Italy.