
Page-1
| PAPERS OF HARRY S. TRUMAN
PRESIDENT'S SECRETARY FILE
Page-2
DISSEMIUATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their officia] duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the parformance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-
ment of State

b. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army

c. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d, Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission.

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Celtection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar-
rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION (NIE Series):
Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of Btate

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
‘Department of the Air Fores
Atomic Exergy Commission

Joint Chiefs of Staff

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Development Board
Munitions Board .
Page-3
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
KASHMIR DISPUTE TO THE END
OF 1951

NIE-41

‘The intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff
participated in the preparation of this estimate. All mem-
ders of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this
estimate on 10 September.
Page-4
PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE KASHMIR DISPUTE
TO THE END OF 1951 :

THE PROBLEM

To estimate probable developments in the Kashmir dispute during 1951, with
particular reference to the possible use of armed force, and to indicate the conse-
quences for US security interests of war between India and Pakistan.

CONCLUSIONS

1. India and Pakistan have once again
reached a critical state of tension over
Kashmir. The military forces of both
countries are deployed opposite each other
on the frontiers, and few additional
measures would be required for either to
initiate hostilities.

2. The Indian Government (GOJI) is un-
likely to precipitate war deliberately, but
is prepared to accept war and is unlikely
to act to reduce the tension.

2, The Pakistan Government (GOP) is
unlikely to precipitate war deliberately 50
cig as the UN appears to GOP leaders to
offer hope of effective action. However,
there is a possibility that the GOP would
deliberately launch or sponsor local action
in Kashmir, especially between 15 Sep-
tember and 1 November.

4, The Kashmir issue has generated high
military, political, and religious pressures
one or more of which might well lead to
hostilities.

5. In the event of war, there will almost
certainly be fighting not only in Kashmir,
but also in the Punjab and probably East
Pakistan (Bengal). It is unlikely that
the UN could effect a cease-fire, if either
side had gained a material advantage
from the fighting.

6. In any extended conflict India would
probabiy be victorious, but its victory
would not be quick or easy.

7. The most important consequence of
wae would be internal deterioration in
boti countries, which might open the way
for a Communist seizure of power in parts
or all of India. In addition, war would
have a serious adverse affect on US rela-
tions with both countries, and would prob-
ably deprive the US of potential air bases
in Pakisten and of important raw mate-
Page-5
srenet

DISCUSSION

The Current Situation

8, Troop movements by both India and Paki-
stan since May have greatly increased the ten-
sion between the two countries and the
possibility of major hostiitties. Almost 80
percent of India’s and 70 percent of Pakistan’s
ground combat forces are now dep.oyed oppo-
site each other in Kashmir itself, and on the
Punjab and East Pakistan (Bengal) frontiers.

8. Pursuant to a Security Counc! resolution
of 30 March 1951, Dr. Frank Graham is now
in the subcontinent seeking to achieve agree-
ment on demilitarization of Kashmir as a
prelude to an impartial plebiscite to deter-
Taine its permanent affiliation. Graham is
due to report to the Council by 29 September,
though he may seek a delay.

20. The chief focus of dispute at the present
time is the projected election of a Constituent
Assembly in the erea of Kashmir controlled
by Indian forces under the 2249 TIN cease-fire
and containing about three quarters of the
population. These elections are scheduled
for 10-30 September, under the auspices of the
pro-Indian Government of Kashmir, headed
‘by Sheikh Abdultah, for the declared purpose
of establishing a constitutional government
for all of Kashmir.

il. The Constituent Assembly elections are
bitterly opposed by Pakistan, and Prime Min-
ister Kiaquat Ali Khan has threatened war to
prevent them. Althoush the ‘UN has written
‘a letter to India stating that the elections are
contrary to the spirit of the March 30 resolu-
tion, Abdullah and the Indian Government
‘tpave reiterated their intention to proceed with
the plan.

Basic Objectives of the Parties in Kashmir
12. The dominant motivating ferce of doth
India and Pakistan on the Kashmir issue is
nationalism tinged with religion. The issue

focuses the passions of both countries,
and since 1047 public opinion, particularly in
Pakistan, has made it one of national prestige.
To Pakistan, founded on the pr: le of a
Moslem nation, i seems intolerable that the

largest of the subcontinent’s princely states,
containing & tly (78 percent)
Moslem population, should be handed over to
India. To the Indians, who have waged &
vigorous campaign to take over the princely
states left uncommitted by , it ap-
pears all but unthinkable to give up & state
‘whose ruler formally acceded to India in 1947.
Nehru’s feelings about Kashmir are intensified
by his long association with Sheikh Abdullah,
by the fact that he himself is of Kashmiri
descent, and by his strong belief in the concept
of a secular state embracing both Moslems and

13, Strategically, the Pakistanis view Kash-
mir as an important military gateway that
would enable India to threaten Pakistan's
principal military base area at Rawalpindi and
also major agricultural areas. Indian strate-
gic interest is less marked; a Pakistani Kash-
mir would outflank much of the East Punjab,
but the border terrain js difficult.

14; Economically, Kashmir's trade is with
Pakistan rather than India. Possession of
Kashmir would slightly improve Pakistan's
contro) over the vital water supply obtained
from the four major tributaries of the Indus
River, though it would not prevent India from
carrying out @ present threat to impair the
flow of two of these tributaries the: cross In-
dian territory before entering Pakix‘an.

15. Eventually, both India and Pakistan
might be satisfied with less than the whole of
Kashmir, However, both are adamant in de.
manding contro! of the Vale area, the heart of
the state, which has a Moslem majority but is
on the Indian side of the cease-fire Hine.

Political Prospects in the Absence of Wor
16. India’s trump card is its present control of
the Vale. A plebiscite conducted under im-
partial auspices in the near future would prob-
ably produce a majority in the Vale for aczes-
sion to Pakistan. However, Indian contrel, ”
with the inevitable intimidation and ban on
pro-Pakistan religious campaigning, would
presumably produce a result favorable to In-
dia in ny Constituent Assembly elections.
Page-6
SECRET

437. Therelore, it is extremely unlikely that
India will postpone or cancel the elections.
‘There is no indication of any further UN ac-
tion to block the elections and almost no
chance that India would heed the UN if it did
take such action.

18, If the elections are held, the resulting
Constituent Assembly will undoubtedly pass
some form of resolution in favor of final affill-
ation with India, Although Indian spokes-
men have conceded that such @ resolution
would not be binding on the UN, India will
certainly make maximum propaganda use of
it and may later reverse Sts position. More-
over, the creation of a constitutional “inde-
pendent” government (in contrast to the
“puppet” Azad Government of the Pakistan-
occupied part of Kashmir) may enlist growing
iuyalty and support among the Kashmiris.
In this way the Indians undoubtedly hope
eventually to present the world with a fait
accompli, at least as to the areas now under
Indian control.

19. Confronted by this sequence of events,
Pakistan—if it did not go to war—would cer-
tainly seek further UN action. Because of its
willingness to accept an impartial plebiscite,
Pakistan undoubtedly believes that it has a
superior moral case at this stage of the dispute
an‘ that further UN resolutions will be favor-
able to it, At the very least it ean count on
firm political support from Arab and Moslem
nations and to a large extent from the British
Commonwealth nations. Present reports in-
dicate that Dr. Graham has little chance of
obtaining an egreed solution. He may pro-
pose the appointment of an arbitrator (al-
ready rejected by India) or perhaps formulate
his own plan for demilitarization, and these
recommendations would go to the Security
Council. At the same time Pakistan would
almost certainly propose & new Tesolution
specifically denouncing and refusing to recog-
nize the Constituent Assembly elections.
Reference to the General Assembly in Novem~-
per is also & possibility (and need not mean
withdrawal of Security Council jurisdiction);
Pakistan might welcome this move as & more
effective means of bringing the pressure of
‘world opinion to bear on India.

Indian and Pakistani Military Capabiléties*

20. The recent Indian troop movements have
prought India’s strength in Kashmir itself to
an estimated 68,000 men. In the East Pun-
jab, India has a striking force of 75,000, in-
cluding an armored division and an independ-
ent armored brigade. Close to the borders of
East Pakistan in Bengal, India has 25,000 to
28,000 men. 7 mot,
21. In Kashmir itself, Pakistani and Azad
Kashmir troops number about 18,000. In the
Lahore-Wazirabad area of the Punjab, Paki-
stan has 57,000 men. Another 15,000 are in
reserve at Peshawar, and could be moved rap-
idly to either front. Elsewhere in West
Fakistan, about 20,000 men are deployed on
internal security. In East Pakistan, Paki-
stan’s forces total an estimated 10,000.

22, The Indian Air Force and Navy, though
small, are superior to Pakistan’s and India has
far greater trained reserves and manpower
resources. Moreover, India has come indus-
trial capacity for arms production, while Paki-
stan has virtually none and would be heavily
dependent on outside supplies. Another ma-
jor Pakistan weakness is the fact that its
transportation and communications network
in West Pakistan parallels the Indian frontier
and is extremely vulnereble to attack.

28. In an all-out war with Pakistan, India
probably would be victorious provided Paki-
stan received no substantial outside help.
Initially, probebly neither country would gain
fe decisive victory, and in the first stages
Pakistan might even win some battles. But
in time the balance would be tipped in India’s
favor by its over-all advantages. The Indian
Navy could blockade Karachi, West Pakistan’s
only major port, and the Indian Air Force
could neutralize the Pakistani Air Force,
though its own offensive capabilities are
meager. .

24. In a limited action designed by either
country solely to take all or part of Kashmir,
‘India would probably also be victorious, but its

© Pull details on the comparative strc ugths of the
Indian and Pakistan! armed forces are given in an
Appendix attached to this estimate.

”
Page-7
success would not be quick or easy. India’s
present troop superiority in the area would be
partially offset by the mountainous terrain
and by the difficulty of bringing up supplies
and reinforcements over the single road be-
tween India and Kashmir. Pakistan’s com-
munications into the area are, on the other
hand, relatively good. There are better roads,
ensier passes, and lower grades.

25. Important elements is. any conflict ‘be-
tween the two countries would be the attitude
of Afghanistan and of the Pathan tribesmen
of the North West Frontier Province. Afghan-
istan itself, which has been diligently courted
by India, would probably make border raids
on Pakistan; past raids have already resulted
in the deployment of elements of two Paki-
stani divisions near the Afghan frontier. On
the other hand, in spite of continuing Afghan
propaganda, some of the Pathan tribesmen
‘would probably fight again on the Pakistani
side, as in 1947, and if so their warlike quali-
ties. would substantially augment initial
Pakistani strength in Kashmir.

26. Weather conditions would seriously ham-
per military operations in Kashmir and the
Punjab until after the Southwest monsoon
ends, generally about 15 September. For a
short time thereafter, major rivers in the
Punjab area would be deep and unfordable,
and it has been reported that flood conditions
now exist in the Lahore area and will prevent
operations there until at least 1 October.
‘Thereafter, fighting conditions should be most
favorable in Kashmir to the end of November
and in the Punjab until next April, although
winter conditions would not preclude opera-
tions in Kashmir. In Bengal, the monsoon
ends later, and the most favorable period
would be December and January.

Likelihood of War to the End of 1951

Deliberate War by India

27. In general, Indian forces are now deployed
so that they could either conduct defensive
operations or launch strong attacks in the
Punjab and against most of the important
centers of East Pakistan. No other movement
of troops would be necessary for India to make

war on all fronts, and it is believed that the
Indian forces have sufficient supplies to carry
out at least a major initicl attack.

28. We estimate that, “despite its troop dispo-
sitions, the Indian Government (GOI) is.un-
likely to precipitate a war deliberately during
this period. Its reasons against war are for-
midable: (a) India already controls the dis-
puted area; (b) war would disrupt the Con-
stituent Assembly elections and subsequent
plans; (c) time is all on India’s side—even if
the elections were postponed, its possession of
most of the disputed areas would still leave it
in a strong position gradually to win over the
Kashmiris; and (d) any extended war would
be a serious threat to Indian economic and po-
Uitical stability and would almoct certainly
Jead to widespread communal rioting between
Hindus and Moslems. The only contrary ar-
guments of any possible weight are thet: (a)
a war that led to quick victories in the West
Punjab and East Pakistan would help the gov-
ernment's wavering prestige; (b) most of In-
dia, including Nehru, opposed partition and
would welcome an opportunity to reintegrate
Pakistan. Howeyer, Nehru is almost certainly
too well aware of the risks to be swayed by the
first of these conSiderations, and anti-parti-
tion sentiment does not generally go to the
length of seeking war. .

29. Indian actions are consistent with this
view of Indian intentions. Its recent troop
movements were probably designed to fore-
stall Pakistani interference with the Consti-
tuent Assembly elections while further deter-
Ting Pakistan by the threat of a Punjab
counterattack.

80. Nonetheless, India is clearly willing to ac-
cept war and is extremely unlikely on its own
initiative to withdraw its forces in such 8 way
‘fas to relax the tension. In the event of war,
India would be unlikely to permit hostilities
to be confined to Kashmir, but would probably
tuke advantage of its superiority on the Pun-
jab front and perhaps in Bengal. - :

Deliberate: War by Pakistan .

81, Pakistan's troops are deployed defensively,
but are in positions in the Lahore-Wazirabad
area from which they could attack either the

4
Page-8
Jammu City area of Indian-controlled Kash-
mir or the East Punjab. In the latter case,
however, an attack could not be in more than
division strength unless forward movements
were first made from the Wazirabad area. The
Pakistani forces in Kashmir itself could not
Jaunch more than a very Hmited attack at this
time without substantial reinforcements,
which would require major troop movements
from other areas.

$2. The Pakistan Government (GOP) appears
unlikely to precipitaic war deliberately. It is
possible, however, that the GOP would delib-

erately launch or sponsor local action in Kash-'

mir, as it did in 1947. This possibility will be
greatest during and immediately after the
Constituent Assembly elections (roughly 15
September to 1 November).

$3. There are strong reasons that should detez
Pakistan from resorting to war. In a long war
Pakistan would almost certainty lose East
Pakistan (containing 60 percent of its popula-
tion) and maior Punjab areas, and its eco-

nomic and political stability—even its very ex-
istence—-would be threatened. However, the
extreme statements of Liaquat and other
Pakistani leaders indicate that they may be
reaching a dangerous mood of frustration in
which these considerations would be out-
weighed by the desire to thwart the Constitu-

ent Assembly elections.
stari leaders, some of whom tend to be con-
temptuous of Indian fighting qualities, may
believe that their forces could make quick
gains in Kashmir (even to capturing Srina-
gar’ and conduct a holding action in the Pun-
jab (possibly aided by the reported floods),
after which Pakistan would appeal for a new
UN cease-fire. Pakistani statements have
used every possible argument to put India in
the wrong and encourage support for @ con-
tention in the UN that military action in
Kashmir is justified because of Indian obdu-
racy and the illegality of the Constituent As-
sembly elections. There is some possiblity
that Pakistan might encourage both the
tribesmen and the Azad Kashmir forces (aided
by Pakistan regulars “on leave”) te attack in
Kashmir and then disclaim responsibility.
GOP leaders might believe that, at the very

Moreover, the Paki- -

east, hostilities in Kashmir would bring about
immediate TN action favorable to Pakistan.

34, If the Constituent Assembly is elected and
conyenes, the GOP's course of action will de-
pend on whether the UN offers rea) hope of a
solution that would offset the effect of the
elections and permit an impartial plebiscite.
"The actions of the Constituent Assembly, pius
Indian “crowing,” will undoubtedly tend to
increase army ard popular pressure for war,
and if the Security Council failed to take even
the steps of denunciation and arbitration, the
GOP might give way to this pressure and start
a war deliberately. However, 80 Jong as the
UN appears to GOP leaders to offer any hope
of effective action, the GOP will probably not

resort to war deliberately.

Unpremeditated War : .

$5. Apart from the possibility of deliberate
‘war, we estimate that there is some chance
that war will be brought on during this period
by achain reaction of explosive factors. These
include; .

a, Unauthorized military action by elemen'
of the Pakistan Army. For some time & mili-
tant group in Pakisten has agitated for ag-
gressive action. An anti-government piot
from this source was nipped in the bud by the
GOP in the spring of 1951. While a recur-
rence of actual revolt appears improbable,
members of this group might succeed in turn-
ing a border incident into a large-scale con-
flict at any time.

. Popular feeling in Pakistan. The GOP
has exercised effective control over the press
and radio to date, and US Embassy Karachi
believes the GOP can continue to suppress in-
fammatory statements if it so desires. Nev-
ertheless, the possibility of e dangerous surge
of feeling exists.

c. Renewal of the widespread communal
rioting that took place in Bengal in the spring
of 1951. ‘This would further arouse feeling in
both countries.

d. Indian internal poiltics. Popular senti-
ment in India is no less intense but notably
calmer than in Pakistan, and Nehru appears.
‘to enjcy virtually unanimous support on the
Kashmir issue. Bowever, some elements of

REGRET... 2; . 5
Page-9
the right wing of the Congress Party are sym-
pathetic to the strongly anti-Moslem and anti-
Pakistan Hindu Mahasabha, and there is a
possibility of inflammatory statements for
political advantage.

3. The chance of unpremeditated war arising
from the above factors is likely to diminish
only if there is a substantial relaxation of ten-
sion. Neither side is likely to relax the ten-
sion by withdrawing troops, but there is a
bare possibility that Nehru might make some
conciliatory statement or that he and Liaquat
might temper the situation by meeting to set-
tle subsidiary issues, such as the water dis-
pute. So Jong as India pursues the Constitu-
ent Assembly plan, the only real chance for
relaxation appears to lie in UN action that
‘would offer hope, not only to the leaders of the
Pakistan Government but also to the army

and people of Pakistan, that the effects of the’

Constituent Assembly plan would be offset.

Consequences of War for US Security
Interests

87. It is untikely that & war between India
and Pakistan could be confined to Kashmir.
At the very outset of hostilities, the UN might
be able to achieve a cease-fire, though India
probably would noi accept one that left Paki-
stani forces in control of the Vale. Once hos-
tilities were fully under way, & cease-fire would
be unlikely so long as either side had hope of
major immediate gains. Wer on a@ broad
scale would have a serious effect on US secu-
rity interest.

38. In the first place, war would increase gen-
eral world tension and uncertainty. Diplo-
matically, its immediate effect would be to
subject the US to heavy pressures for support
from both sides. Whether or not the US took
8n active role in attempting to settle the con-
flict, war would increase the risk thet US
policy might alienate one or both of the parties
and adversely affect their positions in the East-
‘West conflict.

$9, Militarily, war would almost certainly re-
move any early prospect of Pakistan’s joining
in plans for defense of the Middle East against
& Communist attack. US security interests
would also be affected directly through the
denial, by an immobilized or nevtralist Paki-
stan, of potentially important air base sites
that could be used for bomber strikes agains?
any part of the USSR. .

40. From an economic standpoint, if hostil-
ties spread to Bengal, the shipment of impor-
tant raw materials from Calcutta, including
mica, kyanite, and jute, would be impeded or
halted. General disorder in India might also
cause interruption of shipments of manga-
nese, which would have serious effects on US
industry since over 30 percent of the US sup-
ply currently comes from India. While re-
placements for these supplies could almost
certainly be found in the long-run, there
‘would be some serious short-run procurement

problems.

41, By far the most important probable de-

ent, however, would be internal dete-
rioration in India and Pakistan. Although
the outbreak of hostilities might initially
strengthen the respective government's con-
trol, any extended fighting would so weaken
both countries as to make the maintenance of
orderly government a matter of question.
‘There would almost certainly be vast commu-
nal disturbances and a resulting increase in
the severity of the refugee problem. Such
conditions might permit the Indian Commu-*
Nist Party to take over various local areas, and.
there is a possibiiity that it would be able, with
Chinese help, to assume control of the gov-
ernment.* Outright Communist control is
extremely unlikely in Pakistan, but a atate of
internat chaos and immobilization would be
probable.

* The consequences of Communist control of India
to US security interest vis-a-vis the USSR, tspe-
clally in Southeast Asin and the Near East, are
considered in NIE-23, “Position of India in the East-
‘West Conflict.”
Page-10
APPENDIX

COMPARATIVE STRENGTHS OF INDIAN AND PAKISTANI ARMED FORCES
. . Pakistaa
1 ARMY
Active strength
Organized National Guard
Major tactical units; nee
Int
Divisions * Armd
Lotc
Independent brigades
Independent infantry battalions
Kashmiri battalions 4
National Guard battalions in service
TT. NAVY

Light cruisers
Destroyers
Frigates
Large minesweepers.
Lesser types and auxiliaries
Il. AIK FORCE ‘
Jet Fightezs
Conventional Fighters
. Light Bombers

2
91
78
27
68

8

“India has been organizing a Territorial Army. Its ultimate
India bas hod only limtted success in recruiting men for
is to serve, not as 2 combat force, but as an internal police force

"Pakistan has a part-time Nationa! Guard, unarmed, with a personnel
battalions, totalling about 6,700 men, were recently called to uctive duty.)

“According to their respective tables of organization, Indian divisions consist of about ‘21,500 men and
Pakistan! divisions of about 18,000 men. Brigades of both countries consist of atout 3,000 men. However,
Tndian units are very clastic and are often consider:
Page-11
JAMMU and KASHMIP.

a innernanone! boundary