
Page-1

Page-2
This estimate relates exclusively to
trade now being carried on between the
Bloc and the West; it is not concerned
with the effects of present trade controls,
or with the effects of an increase in the
current amount of East-West trade.

The analysis of economic consequences
assumes a complete cessation of trade.
However, it is virtually certain that some,
if not many, non-bloc countries would

  
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
  

  

1. The amount of trade still carried on
between the Bloc and the West is so small
in relation to the total productive capa-
bility of either side that its severance
could not have a significant effect upon
the general level of economic activity of
either the Bloc or the West.

2. Among the goods imported into the
Bloc from the West, however, there are

  
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
  

‘The Soviet Bloc consists of the following coun-
tries: the Soviet Union, Poland, Eastern Germany,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania,
prmCotiminittGhina. Hereafter, the Soviet

Bloc countries will be r@ferred to as the Bloc.

The West refers to all qountries in the world

other than those included in the Bloc.

* For note on the nature of the evidence available
for this estimate, and te related footnote of the
Director of Naval In gence, see page 13.

 
   

   

 
    
   
  
  
 

PROBABLE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A SEVERANCE
OF EAST-WEST TRADE

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the importance of current East-West trade, and the capability, of
the Bloc and the West’ to adjust to its severance.

SCOPE

refuse to cooperate in a complete cessa-
tion of trade in any circumstances short
of general war. The over-all effects of a
severance of East-West trade could not
be estimated without examining the
political reactions to measures to achieve
severance. Therefore, it should be em-
phasized that this estimate does not
examine political questions connected
with a severance of East-West trade.

CONCLUSIONS?

certain items which are of substantial
importance to current Bloc industrial
and military production. These items
include electron tubes and components,
certain chemicals, certain types of ma-
chinery and equipment with their spare
parts, and probably also tin, natural rub-
ber, copper, zinc, and cork. If these
items of import ceased to be available,
bottlenecks would appear in the Bloc
productive system and during a limited
period of time adverse repercussions
would spread through the economy.

3. A complete cessation of imports and
withdrawal of Western shipping services
would not bring about a significant re-

NND 921047 ~25/
Page-3
duction in the present gross national
product of the Bloc. It would, however,
significantly retard the planned increase
of Bloc national product in the years
immediately after trade severance. Dur-
ing these years, also, production of some
specific military end-items would proba-
bly be reduced, but the amount of this
reduction, and the particular items af-
fected, would depend on Soviet produc-
tion policies and on the size and rate of

the use of Bloc stockpiles of strategic .

materials. We are unable to estimate
these factors.

4. We believe that, with the possible
exceptions of natural rubber and elec-
tronic tubes and components, the Bloc
would be capable of replacing concur-
rently, within about four years, all goods
presently imported from the West. Once
this had been done, the effects of a
stoppage of imports would become virtu-
ally negligible.

5. Within the Bloc, the European Satel-
lites account for more than half the
Bloc’s trade with the West; the burden
of readjustment would therefore fall very
heavily on them, and might give rise to
additional difficulties in their relations
with the USSR. The demands of Com-

munist China upon the USSR for eco-
nomic assistance would also become more
insistent if all supplies from the West
were cut off.

6. The physical availability of resources
in the West is sufficient to make the eco-
nomic effects of a severance of East-West
trade virtually negligible. An added
strain would be imposed on the dollar
resources of some Western countries.
Appropriate measures, possibly including
international allocation machinery and
international financial arrangements,
would be necessary if those particular
Western countries which now trade
extensively with the Bloc were not to suf-
fer serious economic dislocations.

7. It is impossible to estimate the strate-
gic, as distinct from the economic, sig-
nificance of a severance of East-West
trade without examining all the political,
economic, and other effects of such a
severance in the light of the policies and
objectives of the Bloc and the West
respectively, and the probable nature,
duration, and timing of a future war.
For this reason we are unable to estimate
the relative strategic effects upon the
Bloc and the West of a severance of East-
West trade.

DISCUSSION

The General Level and Pattern of
East-West Trade

8. The value of officially reported merchandise
trade between the Bloc and the West for 1952,
based on official reports by Western govern-
ments, is estimated to be between $1.6 and
$1.7 billion each way, in 1951 prices. This
represents about 1 percent of the gross na-
tional product of the Bloc, and about one-
fourth of 1 percent of that of the West. West-
ern trade with the Bloc constitutes about 2.5

percent of the total international trade of all
Western countries. Bloc trade with the West
constitutes about one-third of the total inter-
national trade of all Bloc countries.

9. Over and above the officially reported trade
summarized above there is a substantial traf-
fic in goods smuggled out of the West into the
Bloc, or transferred more or less openly but
without being officially reported. The value
of such traffic is not exactly known; it may be
from‘10 to 20 percent as great as the value of

See

NND 921087 462
Page-4
officially reported trade. So far as possible
this irregular traffic has been taken into ac-
count in estimating the importance of specific
items of current East-West trade. In esti-
mating the capability of the Bloc to adjust to
a severance of East-West trade it has been as-
sumed that clandestine and unreported trade
will cease together with officially reported
trade. Some of the more important items im-
ported into the Bloc, however, such as electron
tube components and industrial diamonds, are
high in value and small in bulk, and lend
themselves readily to smuggling. We cannot
estimate the probable amount of such smug-
gling after a severance of legitimate trade; in-
sofar as smuggling took place it would de-
crease the effects of a cessation of legitimate
trade.

10. East-West trade consists primarily of an
exchange of Western capital goods, industrial
raw materials and services, for coal and agri-
cultural, forest and mineral products from the
Bloc. The West sends to the Bloc not only
raw materials but also items produced by ad-
vanced technology, labor-saving manufactur-
ing facilities, and skilled labor, and receives in
return mainly commodities requiring only
limited capital equipment and unskilled labor.
The composition of East-West trade is set
forth in more detail in Annex A. From these
tables it appears that machinery, transporta-
tion equipment, natural rubber, chemicals,
metal ores and metal manufactures together
account for about half of the value of Bloc im-
ports from the West. Western imports from
the Bloc consist primarily of coal, grains, fats
and oils, and forest products.

11. The Bloc merchant fleet now comprises
about 2,500,000 gross registered tons (grt.).
Of this total, 518,000 grt. are lend-lease ves-
sels (83 ships, from 3000 to 7000 grt. each)
which have never been returned to the US.
Seventy-two of these, including 38 Liberty
ships, are virtually the backbone of the Bloc
long-haul merchant fleet both in European
waters and on the route to the Far East. In

_ addition to these lend-lease ships (which in

this estimate are accounted as Bloc vessels),
an average of 1,500,000 grt. of Western ship-

ping are engaged in carrying cargo either
between the West and Bloc or between various
ports of the Bloc itself. Five hundred thou-
sand tons of this shipping are engaged in
trade with Communist China; of this about
two-thirds are used between Corhmunist
China and the West, and one-third between
Communist China and the European Bloc.
Most Bloc vessels trading with Communist
China are bunkered with Western fuel and use
Western ports en route. Moreover, the Bloc
receives other services from the West in con-
nection with East-West trade, includiny ship
repairing and rebuilding, insurance, and
banking. During the past year 61 Bloc ships,
totalling 300,000 grt. underwent 30 days or
more of repair work each in Western ship-
yards?

The Importance of Imports to the Bloc

12. It is clear from the figures presented in
paragraph 7 that the value of goods annually
imported into the Bloc from the West is in-
significant in comparison with the Bloc’s total
economic activity. Considered in the aggre-
gate, therefore, the effect on the Bloc economy
of cutting off imports appears negligible. As
might be expected, however, some imports are
more important to the Bloc than others, and
trade severance would naturally have differ-
ent effects upon different sectors of the Bloc
economy. In order to reach conclusions as to
the importance of specific imports to the Bloc,
it would be desirable to have detailed accounts
of the utilization by the Bloc of each separate
item imported from the West. We do not
have enough data to give such accounts;
hence the importance of specific imports to
the Bloc will be indicated by a few examples,
where information is available. The aggre-
gate effect of cutting off these imports can be
approximately assessed by a method of analy-
sis which will be explained below. (See para-
graph 29.)

13. A preliminary indication is given in An-
nex B, which shows the estimated proportion

‘There is evidence that a large number of addl-
tional ships are awaiting repair. These cannot
be accommodated as long as Soviet yards are de-
voted almost 100 percent to naval construction.

~~

NND 921047 7
Page-5
that imports of certain commodities and
classes of commodities bear to total Bloc sup-
plies (production plus net imports) of these
items. It appears from these tables, and from
other information, that the Bloc supply of
natural rubber and of cork is virtually all im-
ported. Imports of tin provide 29 percent of
current supplies; zinc, 10 percent; copper, 10
percent; and lead, 7 percent. Imports of raw
wool and rayon accourt for 9.3 percent and
5.6 percent, respectively, of Bloc supplies of
those goods. In the various broad categories
of capital goods and manufactured items, im-
ports account for only small fractions of total
supplies.

14. The significance of some of the figures in
Annex B is limited, however, by the fact that
they apply to broad classes of commodities;
this is particularly true of the figures on capi-
tal goods and manufactures, imports of which
form such a small proportion of Bloc supplies.
Thus, for example, it can be shown that the
Bloc depends upon imports for only about 4
percent of its total supply of machine tools,
yet within that 4 percent may be certain types
of tools which the Bloc does not make for it-
self. Thus some specific items of import,
though representing a minor share of total
imports and an insignificant fraction of the
gross national product of the Bloc, may be of
greater importance to the Bloc economy than
their money values suggest. If these imports
ceased to be available, bottlenecks would al-
most certainly appear in the Bloc productive
system, and for this reason the real damage to
the Bloc could easily become a multiple of the
replacement cost of the import, as the indirect
repercussions of its loss spread through the
economy.

15. An example of such “bottleneck” import
items is furnished by certain components of
electron tubes. For its manufacture of elec-
tron tubes the Bloc is dependent on the West
for various critical materials, such as refrac-
tory metals in refined and fabricated forms,
and diamond dies for drawing fine wire. In
addition, though the USSR has enough elec-
tronic mica for its own uses, the Satellites
must rely on imports of this material. Rough-
ly the same situation exists with regard to

nickel, especially radio-grade nickel for cath-
ode sleeves. Tungsten wire, essential to the
production of electric lamps, is largely ob-
tained from the West. None of these mate-
rials represents an appreciable proportion of
the total value of Bloc imports, yet an effec-
tive embargo on these critical materials would
probably cause the Bloc output of electron
tubes to drop by 50 percent as soon as existing
inventories of these materials were used up.
Such a drop would in turn heavily affect the
production of radio and radar apparatus.
Since the production of electron tubes in the
Bloc has been weighted in favor of types for
use in military applications, and will continue
to be so weighted, a drop in their production
would probably have an appreciable effect on
military procurement.

16. Another example is that of heavy electrical
machinery. Approximately one-quarter of
the Bloc’s annual increment of heavy electri-
cal machinery is currently imported from the
West. Many of the Bloc’s industries require
this machinery for military or military-sup-
porting production. The submarine program,
the steel industry, the atomic energy program,
and the railroad equipment industry are ex-
amples of strategic sectors of the Soviet econ-
omy which would be likely to have difficulties
in fulfilling planned output if either the sup-
ply of heavy electrical machinery or the out-
put of other basic industries which in turn
depend on this supply were curtailed. To a
lesser extent the steam and hydraulic turbine
industry may be placed in the same category.
Denial of imports in this field would have an
adverse effect on ship construction, and would
limit the proposed expansion of the electric
power supply.

17. These examples illustrate the fact that
there are, among the comparatively small vol-
ume of imports still going from the West to
the Bloc, a number of “bottleneck” items, loss
of which would cause difficulties to the Soviet
economy and to its production of military end-
items. A “bottleneck” item of import must
have the following characteristics: (a) it must
be a commodity of which a substantial pro-
portion of total Bloc supplies is imported, or
the stoppage of imports will not be much

SESS T

NND 921047 226Y
Page-6
felt; (b) it must have a small number of
uses, all of which are important, or the loss
of imports may be overcome by small reduc-
tions of output in a large number of indus-
tries; (c) it must be a commodity for which
Substitutes cannot easily and quickly be
found; and (d) inventories of the item must
be small in relation to the requirements for
its use.

18. We do not have sufficiently detailed
knowledge of the Bloc economy to identify
directly all such ‘bottleneck items of import.
According to the standard described above,
however, current Bloc imports of foodstuffs,
textile fibers, iron and steel products, some
non-ferrous metals, fertilizer, and a sizeable
Proportion of miscellaneous goods clearly do
not constitute bottleneck items. These com-
modities together represent about half the
value of Bloc imports from the West. We
therefore estimate, for the purpose of cost cal-
culations to be made later in this paper, that
the remaining 50 percent of the value of Bloc
imports represents bottleneck items.*

19. The most important bottleneck items of
import into the Bloc from the West are al-
most certainly electron tubes and components,
certain chemicals, and certain special types of
machinery and equipment with their spare
parts. In addition to these finished products
certain raw materials — tin, copper, zinc,
cork, and natural rubber — are imported to
the Bloc in sufficient quantities to suggest
that a cessation of imports would cause bottle-
necks, if only to a limited extent.

20. To cut off the shipment to the Bloc of “bot-
tleneck” items would obviously cause difficul-

‘This estimate is probably over-generous, since
the Bloc already has considerable production of
many goods in the “bottleneck” categories here
assumed. Moreover, there is evidence that the
Bloc has lately been acquiring capital equipment
to produce some of the goods which we now con-
sider to be bottleneck items. For example, the
Bloc has recently imported machines for making
capacitor paper, diamond dies for wire drawing,
and wire drawing machinery. Thus it may be
that the Bloc’s most critical deficlencies for the
manufacture of electron tubes and components,
as described in paragraph 15 above, have already
been overcome.

ties to the Bloc economy. Yet we cannot esti-
mate the exact impact of such a measure, and
in particular we cannot estimate its impact
upon the production of specific military end-
items. Much of the effect of the embargo
would depend upon the policy of the Bloc
planners. If, for example, Bloc production of
electron tubes were reduced by one-half be-
cause of a stoppage of imports, we may pre-
sume that the Bloc planners would cause as
much of this setback as possible to fall upon
the production of civilian radio sets rather
than of military radar, but we cannot prof-
itably speculate on the details of the planners’
decisions. Likewise, we cannot predict in de-
tail the consequences of a shortage of electric
generators in the Bloc arising from a cessation
of imports, even though we may presume that
these consequences might be made to bear
upon other things than the Soviet atomic en-
ergy program.

21. Finally, we cannot estimate the immediate
effects of a stoppage of “bottleneck” imports
because we do not know the size of Bloc stock-
piles. Since the Soviet rulers must be aware
of the vulnerabilities of their economy, it is a
reasonable presumption that they have at-
tempted to provide as far as possible against
cessation of critical imports by building stock-
piles of the commodities in question. This, as
well as needs for current use, may account for
the pressure which the Bloc uses in trade
negotiations, the clandestine buying, the will-
ingness to pay considerably more than market
prices, and the general urgency with which
the Bloc seeks to acquire critical materials.
We believe it probable that Bloc stockpiles of
all critical items would be sufficient to cushion
the immediate impact of a stoppage of im-
ports, but we are unable to estimate how long
the stockpiles would last, or what the policy
of Soviet planners might be with regard to the
rate of using them.

Adjustment by the Bloc to Severance
of Trade

22. It may be assumed that upon the sever-
ance of East-West trade the Bloc would take
steps to adjust its economy to the new situa-
tion — to compensate as far as possible and as

See

 

NND 921047 Ps
Page-7
quickly as feasible for the loss of imports. We
have therefore to estimate: (a) whether and
how far such compensation is possible; (b)
how long it would take; and (c) how much it
would cost.

23. With respect to the first of these ques-
tions, we believe that the Bloc is capable of
satisfactory adjustment to the loss of imports
from the West, given sufficient time and effort
applied to the task. During the last three
decades the USSR has achieved a productive
capacity second only to that of the United
States. Its technical and scientific skills, par-
ticularly in strategically important fields,
have ceased to be markedly inferior, and have
Proved themselves by the production of jet air-
craft, atomic bombs, and many less conspic-
uous accomplishments, to be of a high order.
The Bloc can draw on the diversified resources
of an entire continent, and on the technical
skills of Germans, Czechs, and others to sup-
plement the Soviet capability. We therefore
believe that the Bloc could, in time and ata
cost, reallocate its Tesources, develop the new
or expand the old facilities and techniques as
required, and produce for itself the goods now
imported from the West or acceptable substi-
tutes. It is in this connection that the aggre-
gate value of these imports becomes signifi-
cant; it is so small in relation to the total of
Bloc resources that the Bloc’s ability to
achieve ultimately a full economic adjustment
to the loss of Western imports is almost self-
evident.

24. The next question relates to the time re-
quired for the Bloc to replace lost imports,‘
and to break the bottlenecks caused by a sever-
ance of trade. The answer to this question
must of course be a matter of judgment; it
cannot be demonstrated. We believe that
within four years the Bloc could expand its
production sufficiently to replace any single
presently imported commodity except natural

“The phrase “to replace lost imports” is inexact.
It is used for convenience in this estimate to
mean the expansion within the Bloc (or the
West) of existing production, and/or the build-

~ ing of new facilities, sufficient to prodiice goods
of the type and in the amount formerly imported,
or acceptable substitutes for such goods.

ea

 

rubber. Most of these imports, considered in-
dividually, could be replaced in less than four
years. We further believe that, with the Pos-
sible exceptions of natural rubber and elec-
tronic tubes and components, the Bloc would
be capable of replacing all of these imports
concurrently within about four years.

25. Replacement by the Bloc of imports of
natural rubber presents a special problem.
We believe that the Bloc could, within three
years, produce an amount of synthetic and re-

. claimed rubber equal to the amount of natural

rubber now imported. For some essential

“uses, however, there is no presently known

substitute for natural rubber. The Bloc
stockpile of natural rubber is estimated sufti-
cient to last five years at Present rates of
usage. If natural rubber were confined to the
most essential uses, primarily airplane tires,
the stockpile would probably last about ten
years. We believe that the Bloc would be
able, before the exhaustion of its stockpile of
natural rubber, either to find a Bloc source of
natural rubber or to develop substitutes which
would be adequate for all essential uses.

26. The fact that a bottleneck was broken in
a given period of time would not mean that
the effects of that bottleneck, in their reper-
cussions through the economy, would be in-
stantly’ cancelled. In a sense the damage
could never be made up, for Bloc production
would permanently remain somewhat less
than it would have been had the interruption
not occurred. As the years passed, however,
and Bloc production continued to increase,
the proportion of this permanent shortfall to
the total of production would diminish toa
negligible quantity.

27. We believe that most of the indirect and
multiplied effects of a stoppage of bottleneck
imports could be overcome by the Bloc econ-
omy within about four years after the stop-
page occurred. In other words, the signifi-
cant effects of a severance of trade upon the
Bloc could not be expected to last more than
about four years. However, the actual dura-
tion of these effects might in Specific instances
be longer or shorter because it would depend
to a great degree upon the decisions of Bloc

 

NND 921047 25,
Page-8
They might, for example, choose
to replace certain imports at a slower rate in
order to reduce the annual cost of doing so.
Our estimate, therefore, is of what it would be
possible for the Bloc to accomplish, not neces-
sarily what it would in fact accomplish.

planners.

28. Finally, there is the question of the aggre-
gate economic cost to the Bloc of a severance
of trade, or, in other words, of the effect of a
severance of trade on general Bloc economic
capabilities. Calculation of this cost for the
long-run period, ie., the period after full ad-
justment to the loss of imports had been com-
pleted, can be made with fair confidence. In
the process of replacing imports, resources
would have to be transferred from other more
productive uses, including those resources for-
merly used to produce goods for export to the
West, to import-replacing industries. These
resources would be used to increase output in
existing plants, to expand productive capacity,
and in some cases to develop new materials as
substitutes. Having made these adjustments
the Bloc would find itself with an allocation of
resources different from what would have
existed in the absence of trade severance.
The gross national product would be lower
than it otherwise would have been, and this
reduction in gross national product would be
the annual economic loss to the Bloc. We
believe that the annual costs to the Bloc of a
complete severance of trade, after adjustment
to the severance was completed, would be
about $900 million, representing about 0.4 per-
cent of Bloc gross national product in the
early years after full internal adjustment.
The percentage would thereafter decline as
Bloc national product continued to increase.

29. It is more difficult to calculate the an-
nual aggregate cost to the Bloc during the
four years immediately following trade sever-
ance, when the adjustment would be taking
place. Presently available data are inade-
quate for a confident estimate. To the grad-
ually increasing cost of replacing lost imports
must be added the gradually decreasing cost
arising from the non-availability of previously
imported commodities. In estimating the
latter, moreover, allowance must be made for

 

“bottleneck” effects, by which the cost of an
unreplaced import is multiplied because of the
repercussions which its loss produces through-
out the economy. On the basis of the limited
data available, we believe that costs for each
of the four years within the period of adjust-
ment to a complete severance of trade would
be roughly as follows: 1.3 percent of gross na-
tional product in the first year after trade
severance; 0.8 percent in the second; 0.6 in the
third; and 0.5 in the fourth.* We consider
that these percentages might vary from one-
half to twice the figures here given. It has
elsewhere been estimated that the increase of
Bloc gross national product during the year
1953-1954 will be slightly less than 6 percent.
It follows that an immediate and complete
severance of East-West trade would probably
reduce this increase to about 4.5 percent. The
retardation of growth might remain appreci-
able for several years thereafter.

30. The nature of the principal Bloc imports,
and of the resources required to build up ca-
pacity to replace them, indicates that the
short-run impact of the adjustment would
probably fall more heavily on the armaments
and capital goods industries than on the
civilian consumer goods sector of the econ-
omy. The combined production of arma-
ments and capital goods might, in the first
year after trade severance, be from 2 to 6 per-
cent less than it would have been had the
trade continued. In subsequent years the
impact on these sectors of the economy, like
that on the economy as a whole, would pro-
gressively diminish.

31. The foregoing discussion of Bloc adjust-
ment to a severance of trade has not consid-
ered the strains which the adjustment might
impose upon the Bloc planning and adminis-
trative system. For example, the European
Satellites account for more than half the
Bloc’s trade with the West; the burden of re-
adjustment would therefore fall very heavily
on them, and might give rise to additional

“In making this calculation, it was assumed that
50 percent of the value of Bloc imported items
represented “bottleneck” imports, and to alow
for their bottleneck effect upon the economy the
direct value of their loss was multiplied by three.

Serer

NND 921047

 

67
Page-9
difficulties in their relations with the USSR.
The demands of Communist China upon the
USSR for economic assistance would also be-
come more insistent if all supplies from the
West were cut off. To estimate the force and
effect of these political and administrative
difficulties is beyond the scope of this paper;
their probable existence nevertheless needs to
be pointed out.

Adjustment by the Bloc to Withdrawal of
Western Shipping

32. A complete severance of East-West trade
would terminate the present employment of
all ships, both Bloc and Western, engaged in
carrying goods between Western and Bloc
ports. It would also presumably involve with-
drawal from Bloc service of those Western
ships now carrying goods under charter be-
tween ports of the Bloc, and denial of bunker-
ing, repairing, and other shipping services
now furnished by the West to the Bloc.

33. The Bloc would be faced with problems of
adjustment in two distinct sectors: trade be-
tween European Bloc ports, and trade between.
the European Bloc and Far Eastern ports.
These two sectors require separate consider-
ation.

34. If all trade between the West and the
Bloc were stopped, about 300,000 gross regis-
tered tons of Bloc shipping now carrying
cargoes between European Bloc ports and the
West would be freed from this employment.
Including lend-lease ships, this tonnage would
be more than enough to make up for Western
shipping now carrying dry cargo between
ports of the European Bloc. Even without
lend-lease ships, Bloc tonnage freed by sev-
erance of East-West trade would probably
still be equal to the amount withdrawn by
the West.’ However, the Bloc would not in
either case have enough tankers to replace
those chartered from the West which are now

"The possibility that the USSR might decide un-
der certain circumstances to limit the use of
lend-lease ships is referred to in SE-37, “Prob-
able Effects on the Soviet Bloc of Certain Courses
of Action Directed at the Internal and External
Commerce of Communist China,” paragraph 31.

 

engaged in the oil trade between Black Sea
ports and the Baltic and Arctic ports. We
believe that the resulting additional load on
Bloc railways could be handled.

35. Current seaborne imports into Commu-
nist China are estimated at about 1.4 million
tons per year, of which perhaps 75 percent
arrives in Western ships. We believe that an
additional amount as great as this is within
the present maximum capacity of the Trans-
Siberian railroad and the connecting lines
into North China. The transportation facili-
ties of Communist China, including Bloc
coastal shipping, would be adequate to dis-
tribute this tonnage, though some additional
strain would be placed upon the Chinese rail-
roads. Since some Bloc shipping would still
be available for traffic to be carried between
the European Bloc and Communist China,
withdrawal of Western shipping would not in
itself affect the Bloc’s capability of maintain-
ing the present volume of trade between Com-
munist China and the rest of the Bloc. It is
unlikely, however, that if East-West trade
were severed all present imports into Com-
munist China from the West would be re-
placed from Bloc sources. Thus the total
volume of Communist Chinese imports might
at least initially be less than at present.®

36. Withdrawal of bunkering and other serv-
ices presently furnished by the West to the
Bloc would reduce the efficiency of the Bloc
merchant fleet and require adjustments in
Bloc shipyard employment. Most Bloc ves-
sels trading between Europe and the Far East
would have to be fuelled from tankers at sea.
This would have to be done at the expense of
the Bloc’s domestic petroleum lift. Addi-
tional fuel would have to be transported by
the Bloc to the Far East, either over the
Trans-Siberian railroad or by tankers. Bloc
shipyards would be forced to convert certain
facilities from naval construction to merchant
ship repair and replacement.

*¥For more detailed discussion of this problem, see

SE-37, “Probable Effects on the Soviet Bloc of
Certain Courses of Action Directed at the In-
ternal and External Commerce of Communist
China.”

—

NND 921047 Air
Page-10
37. We cannot estimate in detail how Bloc
planners would allocate available shipping to
various routes if Western shipping and sery-
ices were withdrawn. There would be a loss
of efficiency due to an inadequate number of
long-range ships and increased repair time on
those available. Communist China’s external
trade would probably be reduced, and the
planned expansion of the Communist Chi-
nese economy delayed. We believe that the
problems of adjustment presented to Bloc
planners could in time be solved, but that
during the period of adjustment additional
strains would be placed on the Bloc’s internal
transport system and costs would increase
because of the greater expense of land trans-
portation.

Adjustment by the West to a Severance of
East-West Trade

, 88. The physical availability of resources in
the West is sufficient to make the economic
effects of a cessation of East-West trade vir-
tually negligible, if successful arrangements
are made for reallocation of these resources
among the countries concerned. It is esti-
mated that Western European coal imports
from the Bloc account for only 1.6 percent of
total Western European coal consumption;
bread grain imports for only 2.4 percent, and
coarse grains for only 3.3 percent. Moreover,
the West imports nothing from the Bloc which
could not be replaced from Western sources,
either in kind or by acceptable substitutes, if
trade with the Bloc should cease. There
would be no bottleneck problems worth men-
tioning. No appreciable curtailment of essen-
tial production would be necessary.

39. To some Western countries, however, cur-
rent levels of trade with the Bloc are im-
portant. In 1952, about 20 percent of the
foreign trade of Finland, and about 10 percent
of that of Austria, was carried on with the
Bloc. Finland relied on imports from Poland
for two-thirds of its coal consumption, Sweden
for 28 percent, Austria for 15 percent, and
Denmark and Italy for 7-8 percent. In the
crop year 1951-1952, Finland bought more
than 30 percent of its supplies of food grain

from the Bloc, Norway 20 percent, and Egypt
about 10 percent. The United Kingdom ob-
tained 12 percent of its coarse grain supplies
from the USSR. These imports are advan-
tageous to the receiving countries primarily
because alternative supplies of these com-
modities would have to be paid for mainly in
dollars.

40. Some of the commodities now exported by
Western countries to the Bloc are produced
at relatively high cost, and the producers
have been enabled to make these exports be-
cause the Bloc has paid premium prices or
hhas made advantageous barter trade conces-
sions. In such cases, special difficulties
might be encountered in adjusting to the ces-
sation of East-West trade. In 1951, Finland
sold 69 percent of its commercial exports of
machinery in Eastern Europe, Austria 40 per-
cent, Sweden 22 percent, and Italy 16 percent.
Soviet orders also proved attractive to some
of the European shipyards. More recently,
Ceylon sold one-third of its rubber output to
Communist China, at a price which was only
slightly higher than the world market price.
In this case, Communist China’s willingness
to conclude a long-term agreement to supply
rice in exchange for rubber was an important
factor.

41. If the various Western countries thus
affected were not to suffer serious dislocation
of their domestic economies from a severance
of East-West trade, they would have to be
provided with imports in place of those they
now receive from the Bloc and to be assured
of markets in which to sell the products they
now sell to the Bloc. In the long run these
problems might be solved as Western trade
naturally settled into new channels, so that
imports were bought from, and exports sold
to, Western countries rather than the Bloc.
Such a development would have its difficul-
ties, and would require adjustments such as
lowering the prices of the exported goods,
shifting production to other goods, and
changing marketing practices. If the gen-
eral level of Western trade remained high,
these adjustments could probably be accom-
plished in about two years. There would be
some permanent cost, because some commodi-

SR

NND 921047 XKOF
Page-11
ties would always be more expensive if pro-
cured in the West than if purchased from the
Bloc. This cost would be low, however, and
would scarcely be a perceptible proportion of
the gross national product of the West.

42. In the short run, while this adjustment
was being made, the United States would have
to be the chief Western supplier of commodi-
ties such as coal and grains which are now
procured from the Bloc. These commodities
would have to be paid for in dollars. As an
indication of the magnitude of this problem,
we estimate that if current East-West trade
were suddenly and completely severed, West-
ern Europe alone would have to incur an
additional dollar expenditure of about $300
million in the first year after the severance,
if its imports from the Bloc were to be fully
replaced. This estimate makes allowance for
the additional dollar earnings (or savings)
which would result from the retention in the
Free World of goods which are now exported
to the Bloc.

43. The greatest problems of the West in
adjusting to a severance of trade with the
Bloc would be political and administrative
rather than strictly economic. The willing-
ness of Western governments and peoples to
make the necessary adjustments—to give
and to receive financial aid, to alter trade
channels, to lower trade barriers, to seek new
export markets, to use substitute materials,
to set up and operate international machinery
for the allocation of resources— would de-
pend on many factors, including the circum-
stances under which East-West trade was
severed. These problems, like the correspond-
ing ones for the Bloc mentioned in paragraph
31 above, lie beyond the scope of this esti-
mate, important though they would probably
be to the success of the adjustment.

 

Relative Strategic Effects of a Severance of
Trade upon the Bloc and the West

44. A decrease or cessation of East-West trade
would be economically disadvantageous to
both the Bloc and the West. The preceding
discussion indicates that it would, from a
purely economic point of view, almost cer-
tainly be more disadvantageous to the Bloc
than to the West. It does not necessarily
follow, however, that a decrease or cessation
of East-West trade would afford a net strate-
gic advantage to either side. Such calcula-
tions can be usefully made only in relation
to given situations or policies: whether peace
or war is contemplated; whether war is to be
short or long; whether it is to be begun im-
mediately or after a lapse of time; where it is
to be fought; what weapons are to be used;
what allies are to be cultivated.

45. For these reasons we are unable to esti-
mate the relative strategic effects upon the
Bloc and the West of a severance of trade.
For example, we have not examined the
political and social disturbances in the West
that might under various circumstances
attend a severance of trade with the Bloc.
Even if we had done so, however, we could
not weigh their strategic significance against
such opposing factors as the retardation in the
Bloc’s economic growth that a severance of
trade would produce. It is impossible to de-
termine the strategic significance of a sever-
ance of East-West trade without examining
all the political, economic, and other effects
of such a severance in the light of the policies
and objectives of the Bloc and the West
respectively, and the probable nature, dura-
tion, and timing of a future war.

nnp 921047 AAD
Page-12
Foods, beverages and tobacco .
Fats andoils . oe
Crude rubber .
Raw cotton
Raw wool . ,
Other fibers and textile mfrs. :
Iron ore, iron and steel and mfrs. .
Non-ferrous ores, metals and-mfrs.
Chemicals See eee
Machinery . . . ele
Transport equipment :
Other exports .

TOTAL

Foods, beverages and tobacco

Fatsandoils . . :

Forest products and mfrs,

Textile fibers and mfrs.

Coal | .

Non-metallic minerals (excl. coal) ‘and mirs. .

Chemicals . .

Ferrous and non- ferrous metals and mfrs,

Machinery and = an

Other imports 7 .
TOTAL

 

 

WESTERN IMPORTS FROM THE BLOC, JANUARY ~ DECEMBER 1951

Percent
29.8

 

NND 921047 ?¥y
Page-13
ANNEX B

1Z

RATIO OF NET BLOC IMPORTS OF SELECTED COMMODITIES

TO ESTIMATED TOTAL SOVIET BLOC SUPPLIES?! IN 1951

ComMopITy

Cork

Crude rubber (natural
and synthetic)

Tin

Copper

Zinc

Wool

Lead

Storage and primary
batteries

Ball and roller
bearings

Electrical & electronic
testequipment |

Rayon

Cotton
Mercury
Telephone and

telegraph
Iron ore

Timber

Aluminum

Radio and television
receivers

Naphthalene

Crude petroleum and
refined petroleum
prod.

Plates and sheets

Caustic soda

Steel rails

Tungsten

Electric motors and
generators

‘Production plus net imports.

RATIO oF NET

 

Soviet Bioc Soviet Bioc Larorts To
UNIT oF Net Laports Supplies Suppures*
QUANTITY 1951 1951 1951
000 MT: 28.300 28.300 approx. 100.00
000 MT. 177.300 411.700 43.1
000 MT 6.115 21.115 28.96
000 MT 36.100 359.700 10.00
000 MT 23.800 246.800 9.64
000 MT 24.910 269.110 9.26
000 MT 11.300 169.300 6.67
000 MT 3.000 49.270 6.09
000
bearings 6.978 114.978 6.07
000,000 1950
rubles 11.156 190.156 - 5.87
000 MT 11.800 209.400 5.65
000 MT 125.000 2,325.000 5.38
000 MT 80.413 1,589.900 5.00
000 flasks (76 lbs) 1.372 30.772 4.46
000,000 1950
rubles 20.000 479.000 4.18
000,000 MT 1.379 55.994 2.46
000,000 cu. meters 188 12.158 1.54
000 MT 7.300 302.400 2.41
000,000 1950
rubles 7.264 324.764 2.24
000 MT 1.580 77.380 2.04
000 MT 700.000 48,868.000 143
000 MT 92.000 6,868.900 1.33
000 MT 4.3555 521.255 0.83
000 MT 19.000 2,658.000 0.71
MT 71.000 10,211.000 0.70
000,000 1950
rubles 30.100 4,507.000 0.66

* Reported net Soviet Bloc imports of steel structural shapes, animal fats and oils, steel wire and wire
rods, cattle, pig iron, professional electronic equipment, vegetable oils, meat and meat products, power
and distribution transformers, cotton yarn, sulfuric acid, cobalt, wool yarn, bauxite, chromite, cresols,
and nitric acid accounted for less than one-half of one percent of total current Soviet Bloc supplies of

these commodities in 1951.

oes

 

NND 921047 7

nv

we
Page-14
NOTE ON THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE
AVAILABLE FOR THIS ESTIMATE

This estimate rests mainly on an analysis by the Economic Intelligence Commit-
tee, based on evidence which in many respects is deficient. As is indicated more
specifically at appropriate points in the Discussion, all estimates must be regarded as
rough orders of magnitude, subject to considerable margins of error. These margins

’ are wider for the short-run than for the long-run estimates.
With due allowance for these margins of error, however, we believe the conclu-

sions’ as stated are valid.

\The Director of Naval Intelligence believes that
the conclusions of NIE-59 should be viewed with
caution. The evidence on which they are based
is in many respects inadequate and tenuous.
The subject of the Soviet Bloc economy embraces
wide areas of information which are either with-
held from our knowledge or are purposely dis-
torted as a matter of Soviet policy. Available
evidence in this field derives to a great extent
trom Soviet claims or published statistics where
the possiblity of substantial error and the likeli-
hood of deliberate deception exist. It is further

believed that this estimate tends to emphasize
Bloc economic strength and adaptability by
stressing the relatively minor quantitative effects
of denial of Western imports without sufficiently
exploring the qualitative effects or the weak-
nesses and vulnerabilities of the Bloc economy
This tendency, together with our inability tc
estimate the strategic effects of trade severance
creates an impression of Bloc economic invul-
nerability and self-sufficiency which {is incom-
patible with past and present Bloc efforts tc
obtain imports and services from the West.

Siete LD

NND 921047 228