
Page-1
SPECIAL ESTIMATE C3C0360

PROBABLE CONSEQUENCES OF
THE PROSECUTION OF THE ANTITRUST
SUIT AGAINST CERTAIN US OIL COMPANIES

FOR THE PERSONAL ATTSITIC!
OF THE ADDRESSEE ONLY.

 

Se9.t0a May ndnatad dont ade

 

SE-28/1
Published 2 January 1953

The following member organizations of the Intelligence
Advisory Committce participated with the Central Intelli-
gence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.

AU members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee con-

curred in this estimate on 29 December 1952, except the

Assistant to the Director, Federal Bureau of Investiga-

tion, who abstained from comment, neither concurring
nor dissenting.

i LIMITED DISTRIBUTION

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

atin FOP-SEGRER
9 SEP 1997
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

 
   
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
      

 

   
   

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipign
d on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recip ent’'s
uire the information for the performance of their official g Fur-

elsewhere in the department to other offices which-fequire the in-
eadby the following:

     
    
  
  
  
 
 
  
 

a. Special Assistant

ment of State
b. Assistant Chief of Staff, G.2, for the D Sartment of the Army

c. Director of Naval Intelligence, te ‘e Department of the Navy
A e Department of the Air Force

d.

e.

f. Commission

g. Assistant to Investigation

2 Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, any other De-
fhent or Agency

Pris copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance
appjicdble security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by a
pengement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

  
  
    
    

WARNING
This material contains information affecting
the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws,
Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner
to an unauthorized person is prohibited by law.
Page-3
PROBABLE CONSEQUENCES OF THE PROSECUTION OF THE
ANTITRUST SUIT AGAINST CERTAIN US OIL COMPANIES

 

NOTE

This paper deals only with the consequences of the publication of the FTC
report and of the possible indictment and trial of US oil companies. It
does not consider the consequences of a judgment for or against the oil

companies.

ESTIMATE

1. In SE-28,! we estimated that publication
of the “Report of the Federal Trade Com-
mission on the International Petroleum
Cartel” would:

a. be exploited in Soviet-Communist and
other anti-US propaganda;

b. tend to impair basic US relations with
the UK and other Western countries;

c. adversely affect the position of the US,
and of US oil companies, in the Middle East;
and

d. strengthen attacks against US business
interests in other areas.

2. The FTC report was published on 22
August 1952. The fact that deletions were
made is a matter of public report, but the
text of the deleted portions has not been
publicly revealed.

3. The effects noted in SE-28 have not yet
materialized in any significant degree as a
result of publication of the FTC report or of
the initial legal proceedings stemming there-
from.

4. However, publication of the report has
already provided Communists and nationalist
extremists with material which they can use
in an aggressive propaganda campaign to the

 

‘Published 8 May 1952.

    

detriment of US interests at any time they
so decide. We are unable to estimate when
or in what manner they will do so.

5. Indictment and trial of the oil companies
would probably bring out additional material
which could be exploited by Communists and
nationalist extremists to discredit US oil com-
panies and other US foreign business enter-
prises. On the other hand, abandonment of
the case would lay the US Government open
to charges of attempting to suppress dam-
aging evidence and of condoning the practices
alleged in the original complaint.

6. Past and possible future revelations will
probably provide an additional stimulus to
demands in Middle Eastern countries and in
Venezuela for a larger. share of oil revenues.
They will also provide nationalist extremists
with additional ammunition for use in their
campaign in behalf of nationalization of oil.
These revelations are not, however, in our
judgment, likely to be a decisive element
affecting the policy of these countries with
regard to nationalization of oil resources.

7. In the UK and other Western European
countries there has been criticism of the
soundness of US judgment in publishing the
FTC report. The prosecution of the case
would place a further strain on US relations
Page-4
——E-OP=SECRE

with these countries. These countries are
generally more tolerant of cartel arrange-

ments than is the US. They have questioned,
and will probably continue to question, the
soundness of 2 policy which, in order to sup-
;. port 2a principle that they regard as of minor
importance, risks reactions in oil producing

countries which might result in the loss of
major strategic resources. There are, how-
ever, no indications that the publication of
the FTC report has impaired basic relations
with the UK and other Western countries, or
that the indictment and trial of the oil com-
panies would be likely to do so.