
Page-1
SECRET NIE 10-2-64
“GONFROMED DISSENT 10 June 1964

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 10-2-64

Prospects for the International
Communist Movement

Submitted by the
: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
{ Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As Indicated overleaf
10 JUNE 1964

COMFROLEO-DISSEM N° 504
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, NSA, and FBI.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Director of the National Security Agency
The Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation

Abstaining:
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB, the subject being
outside of his jurisdiction.

 

GROUP Tt
id

atic:
ing and
sification.

 

 

SECRET
Page-3
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 10-2-64

Prospects for the International
Communist Movement
Page-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
THE PROBLEM ..... 2.0.0... 01s a
CONCLUSIONS 7 : feel te fee eee tee 1

DISCUSSION .... eae a . . 5

I. INTRODUCTION .. Phoebe epederdecturteetebe eee 5
II. THE COMMUNIST STATES ao js 5
The Sino-Soviet Dispute an 5
The Other Communist Powers ..................-..0000005 _ 7
The Soviet Camp ................. teeta eee lee . 7
The Chinese Bloc ......... 0.0... eee nn)
Cuba 22 eee ... 10

III. TRENDS AMONG THE NONGOVERNING COMMUNIST
PARTIES .... — a 7 ee - 10

Western Europe 2.000.000... 00.0 eee eee eee eee. 12

 

: Sub-Saharan Africa 00.000 eee eens 12
i Latin America 2.0.0.0. 00.0220 coco cece eee eee Lo B
I Far East ........ Thee terpeefedeedenlealeneespecl ceveeees 14
4 Front Organizations ..... 00000000000... 00 eee 15
i | IV. GENERAL IMPLICATIONS ............. Teele 16
7
Page-5
PROSPECTS FOR THE
INTERNATIONAL COM-
MUNIST MOVEMENT

THE PROBLEM

To examine the situation and probable developments in the
world Communist movement.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The international Communist movement is now openly
split into majority and minority factions oriented respectively
toward the Russians and the Chinese. It is also disturbed by
other factors, such as the weakening of Soviet authority in Eastern
Europe, the example of Yugoslavia, and the independent inclina-
tions of a number of Communist parties, notably the Communist
Party of Italy. (Paras. 1-16)

B. The Sino-Soviet dispute will probably continue to have its
ups and downs, and in certain circumstances relations between
the two states might improve considerably. However, the rift
is so deep and the national interest of each party so heavily en-
gaged that there is now virtually no chance of reconciliation
under the present leaders. The international movement may
now be on the eve of a formal split, but whether or not this step
is taken, the bitter struggle for control and influence over the
Communist parties will continue. Further tension in state rela-
tions between China and the USSR also seems likely, especially
on the common frontier. The demise of either or both of the
present leaders would offer some prospect of temporary ameliora-
tion of the dispute, but we believe that the fundamental differ-
ences between the two powers would remain (Paras. 2-5)

C. The international Communist movement as a whole is
likely to be characterized by increased dispersion of authority

SECRET 1
Page-6
SEGRE

and by more independent conduct by various parties.. Although
Soviet power remains a major factor in Eastern Europe, further
manifestations of autonomous and nationalist behavior will prob-
ably occur. Among the parties out of power, we foresee a trend
toward regionalism—as in the Far East, but also perhaps in
Western Europe and Latin America. The Sino-Soviet competi-
tion for influence will in some cases lead to further splits within
individual parties. At the same time, Moscow and Peiping will
remain powerful sources of material support for their followers,
and will retain considerable operational influence on a bilateral
basis. (Paras. 11, 24-25, 29-33)

D. For the non-Communist world this situation offers im-
portant advantages and some dangers. The assertion of di-
vergent national interests by Communist powers offers an oppor-
tunity for the West to deal profitably with some of them indi-
vidually. The Sino-Soviet conflict is increasingly absorbing the
energies of the USSR and Communist China and diverting them
from sharp contentions with the major Western powers.’ Among
the nongoverning parties, a few have already suffered severe set-
backs as a result of the conflict. On the other hand, some Com-
munist parties. will become more effective and will gain greater
freedom of action and respectability because of their more in-
dependent status. While in some countries the parties will tend
to lose their rationale and elan, in others they will probably
emerge as more formidable revolutionary organizations, though
more national than international in character. Regardless of
internal quarrels, Communists will retain an underlying emnity
toward the West if only because their convictions are in so many
respects incompatible with traditional Western concepts of po-
litical and economic life. (Paras. 37-40)

E. In general, we foresee the emergence of a variety of Com-
munists and Communist parties, some chiefly influenced by Mos-
cow or Peiping, some largely autonomous. In conducting their
relations with Communist states and forming their policies
toward revolutionary movements, the principal non-Communist
powers will probably find it increasingly advantageous to judge

*For discussion of the impact of the conflict on Soviet and Chinese foreign

Policy, see NIE 11-9-64, “Soviet Foreign Policy,” dated 19 February 1964, and
NIE 13-63, “Problems and Prospects in Communist China,” dated 1 May 1963.

2 SECRER
Page-7
<steRtT™

each particular situation on its own merits, rather than on the
assumptions which generally prevailed when Moscow unquestion-
ably dominated the international movement. This situation
offers new opportunities and advantages to Western policy, but
it presents new dangers and difficulties as well. (Paras. 40-43)
Page-8
DISCUSSION

|. INTRODUCTION

1. The international Communist movement, once an apparently
monolithic organization subservient to Stalin, has split apart under
pressure of a conflict between the two chief Communist powers. There
are variations and independent tendencies within the two contending
groups of Communist states; in the free world, many Communist parties
are tending to look more and more to their own local and regional
interests. It is virtually out of the question that unity can be re-
established on the old terms; the main question now is what forms
the growing diversification will take.

ll. THE COMMUNIST STATES

The Sino-Soviet Dispute

2. The emergence into the open of the dispute between the USSR
and Communist China marked a major stage in the disruption of the
unity of the international Communist movement. The present phase
of this dispute dates back at least to the 20th Party Congress and Khru-
shchev’s reinterpretation of basic policies and doctrines. Even under
Stalin serious differences had existed, but not until 1959 did the latent
antagonisms become a critical and open issue. We can identify a wide
variety of factors, and no single cause is predominant. Longstanding
conflicts of national interest have played a role, together with old cul-
tural and racial antagonisms. More recently, the Chinese have chal-
lenged the Soviet claim to exercise controlling authority in the inter-
national Communist movement. The quarrel was greatly stimulated
by the refusal of the USSR to provide China with the means to become
a nuclear power, and its failure aggressively to support Chinese national
ambitions. There is also a bitter personal rivalry between Khrushchev
and Mao. The dispute, therefore, is a mixture of ideological, national,
and personal conflicts, which explains its fundamental character.

3. Each year has seen a deepening of the conflict and a further de-
terioration in party and state relations. Last year both sides discarded
the device of indirect attack and made open denunciations. An at-
tempt at bilateral negotiations was doomed beforehand, and -quickly
broke down. Since then: the Chinese have built up a voluminous record
of charges against the Soviet party, government, and Khrushchev per-
sonally. The Soviets have recently renewed their Maneuvering to iso-
late China and possibly organize an international conference of con-
demnation. The Chinese have openly recognized various. dissenting
Communist groups as legitimate parties, thereby laying the ground-

SECRET 5
Page-9
EeRET”

work for their own international network of parties. In essence, a
de facto division has already occurred between the Chinese and Soviet
parties, and between their respective allies.

4, It is clear that the Sino-Soviet split is so deep and the national
interest of each party so heavily engaged that there is now virtually no
chance of reconciliation under the present leaders. The international
movement may now be on the eve of a formal split, though the precise
manner in which this might occur is still unclear.2 In any case the
bitter struggle will almost certainly continue, regardless of its organiza-
tional form, with each side seizing opportunities to impair the prestige
and influence of the other. State relations must suffer as a result.
Political and economic relations are already minimal. Military rela-
tions have deteriorated to the point where the value of the alliance to
either power is questionable, though this is not to say that the Soviets
would withhold support from the Chinese in a situation where they
considered their own vital interests to be endangered. Both powers
are likely to become increasingly concerned about the security of. their
common frontier. Attempts at subversion among national minorities
across this frontier have already occurred. We believe that neither
side expects to undertake major military action against the other, but
border clashes of significant proportions may take place. The Chinese
are undoubtedly more concerned about Soviet military power than the
Soviets are about Chinese, and we do not exclude the possibility that
the Soviets at some point may try to intimidate the Chinese by military
action on the border.

5. Despite the present intensity of the Sino-Soviet dispute, the quarrel
will still probably have its ups and downs, and in certain circumstances
relations might improve considerably. The demise of Mao Tse-tung
would open the way for his successors to tone down the dispute, if they
were so inclined, and the need for economic and military help might
impel the successor regime to such action. Similarly, Khrushchev’s
successors might want a modus vivendi with China so they could con-
centrate on other matters. However, we doubt that any of the prospec-
tive successors could view the basic issues much differently than the
present regimes. A meaningful compromise would involve major con-
cessions and a repudiation of much that has happened. Any arrange-
ment reached by new leaders, therefore, would be largely a working

? Defining the final step becomes more difficult as fewer and fewer steps remain
to be taken. It now may be a question of formal condemnation of the Chinese
by a majority of the parties in a meeting, excommunication of the Soviets by
a formal meeting of the Chinese and their supporters, or formal action by the
Soviet or Chinese Central Committee severing party ties.

6 “SPCREP
Page-10
SCRE

arrangement rather than any resolution of fundamental differences,
which would almost certainly remain.?

The Other Communist Powers

6. Within the Communist world the basic split is reflected inside both
Soviet and Chinese camps, and each side can exert some influence in the
other’s sphere. The Soviets continue to hold sway over East Europe,
minus Albania. The. Communist Chinese are predominant in Asia,
except for Mongolia. Then there is Yugoslavia, itself a cause of dis-
agreement, formally nonaligned in the world, but accepted by the So-
viet sphere as a legitimate Socialist state. And there is also Cuba,
publicly loyal to the USSR but advocating a militant policy more in
accord with the views of the CPR.

The Soviet Camp

7. The Soviet ability to control even sympathetic Communist coun-
tries has been declining. In discarding Stalin’s methods, the Soviets
were led to emphasize the concept of a Bloc held together by
willing cooperation rather than by coercion. Khrushchev’s idea was
of a vague commonwealth of Communist countries, autonomous in
internal matters, but bound to the USSR by common ideological goals
and foreign policies, This commonwealth was to embrace elements
from both right and left, including Yugoslavia as well as China and
Albania. An inherent contradiction in the concept between “equal”
status and subservience to Moscow has made practical implementation
difficult, and this dilemma has been greatly accentuated by the dispute
with China. Nevertheless, Khrushchev is still advancing the idea of a
commonwealth, though his acceptance of Yugoslavia as a member has
made Chinese and Albanian participation all but impossible.

8. As the Sino-Soviet conflict has developed, a number of East Euro-
pean regimes have become aware that their bargaining power has grown
with the need of the Soviets for support against China, and they have
become more assertive. Surprisingly, the country which has exploited
this situation most vigorously has been Rumania, previously considered
one of the most submissive of Satellites. Rumania Successfully defied
Moscow last year, refusing to abandon its plan for broad industrial
development or even to adjust it to the requirements of CEMA‘ It
indicated that its support in the Soviet dispute with China was not
to be taken for granted. Faced with such insubordination, the Soviets

*The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation takes the Position that,
based on the evidence now available, it is Premature to conclude that any arrange.
ment reached by new leaders in the Soviet Union and Communist China would be
largely a working arrangement rather than a resolution of fundamental differ-
ences.

“Council for Economic Mutual Assistance,

SEEREF 7
Page-11
abeREr

gave way, postponing their plans for integrating the Bloc economies
and for establishing a central planning authority for CEMA.

9. This concession only enhanced the nationalistic inclinations of the
Rumanian leaders. More and more, their policies have shown an in-
dependent bent, occasionally manifested in an anti-Soviet manner. On
the whole, they have supported Soviet positions on foreign policy and
ideological questions but not on the key one of disciplining the Peiping
regime. They have attempted to mediate the Sino-Soviet dispute—an
attempt which has enhanced their independent status and caused con-
siderable embarrassment to the Soviets. Most recently, the party
leaders have gone so far as publicly to condemn both China and the
USSR for their actions in the dispute.

10. There are, of course, important constraints upon independent
behavior by the Satellites. Soviet military power remains dominant
in the area. The East European countries are bound to one another
and to the USSR by mutual commitments under the Warsaw Pact.
The Satellite economies continue to be closely linked with that of the
USSR; indeed, economic cooperation and specialization is favored in
one respect or another by all the Satellites, even though there are dis-
agreements over CEMA policies. They do not all necessarily wish to
follow policies at odds with those of Moscow; generally they are con-
tent to follow Moscow’s lead on major issues of international policy—
for example, on the German question.

11. In spite of these considerations, Moscow’s difficulties in main-
taining a satisfactory degree of control over developments in Eastern
Europe will almost certainly increase. Differences among the East
European countries themselves are becoming more apparent. Cul-
tural and political ferment in Czechoslovakia has aroused alarm in the
East German regime, lest the disturbing tendencies spread to that
country. Recent moves by various Communist countries to improve
their relations with West Germany have drawn a public rebuke from
leaders of the East German regime. The historic rivalries and national
antagonisms of Eastern Europe will to an increasing degree tend to
disturb Communist unity in that area.

12. Yugoslavia has been one of the strongest Soviet supporters in
the Sino-Soviet dispute. Partly as a consequence of this, Yugoslav po-
litical and economic ties with other East European regimes and with
the USSR have been renewed and considerably strengthened in recent
years. The Soviets dropped their previous demand that in return for
a closer relationship with the Soviet Bloc countries, Yugoslavia should
hew more closely to the Soviet line. This new relationship is advan-
tageous to Belgrade because it raises the prestige of Yugoslavia’s in-

“For further discussion of developments in Eastern Europe, see NIE 12-64,
“The Outlook in Eastern Europe,” scheduled for July 1964.

8 “SECRET
Page-12
“SECRET

dependent Communist road, especially in Eastern Europe. Another con-
sequence has been that the Yugoslavs have shown themselves willing
on occasion to use their influence in underdeveloped areas, particularly
in Africa, in behalf of Soviet international positions. We believe that
this arrangement suits both sides, and that the Soviets will not demand,
nor will the Yugoslavs agree to relinquish, their independence or freedom
of maneuver.

13. Outer Mongolia is the only Asian Communist country which is
firmly in the Soviet camp. The Soviet advantage here is that the
Mongols fear the Chinese more than they do the Soviets. Moreover,
they appreciate the fact that the Soviets, under Khrushchev, have done
much to help Outer Mongolia develop. The USSR is likely to retain
primary influence over developments in the MPR, but the Chinese will
continue to have some leverage because of the Mongolian desire to avoid
complete subjection to Moscow.

The Chinese Bloc

14, As compared with 1960, when China had only a few hesitant sup-
porters, the Chinese now can be said to have a “camp.” Oddly enough,
their strongest and most unequivocal supporter is in Eastern Europe.
Albania’s extremism and its strong support for China has been largely
a reflection of its fear that it will be left to the mercies of Yugoslavia,
whose large Albanian minority provides a potential rival ruling group
as an alternative to the Hoxha regime. In China’s more immediate
sphere of influence, the Chinese position in North Korea and North
Vietnam is not as strong as the long-established Soviet position in East-
er Europe. During the past year North Korea has subscribed almost
completely to Chinese positions and its relations with China have grown
closer. At the same time, its relations with the Soviets have cooled,
and there have been indications of Soviet economic pressure and even
of attempts to subvert the North Korean leadership. Nevertheless, the
Soviets still retain an important military tie with the country, and
they continue to supply it with certain items of military aid. Chinese
influence will probably continue to be paramount in North Korea, but
the Koreans will not wish an irretrievable break with Moscow if they
can avoid it.

15. From the beginning, North Vietnam has struggled to stay neutral
in the Sino-Soviet dispute, and has found it more and more difficult to
do so. Proximity to China and the pressures of the war in South Viet-
nam impel the North Vietnamese party toward China’s side. It now
espouses Chinese views on most doctrinal issues in the dispute. How-
ever, its stand is somewhat less extreme than North Korea’s, and it
continues to trade with and to receive aid from the USSR and the East
European Satellites. Ho Chi Minh has tried to prevent a formal Sino-
Soviet split, probably because he fears that such a split would result

SECRET 9
Page-13
“Srerer

in his coming under Chinese control. We believe that North Vietnam
will continue to side with the Chinese on most issues, but that Hanoi
will seek to maintain its ties with Moscow and to avoid too close a
Chinese embrace.

Cuba

16. Castro has publicly supported a number of important Soviet posi-
tions, although he is not fully committed to the Soviet side. Both the
Soviets and the Chinese are acutely conscious of Cuba’s importance in
the Communist movement in Latin America, and each has actively
sought Cuba’s support; the Soviets have used Cuban economic and mili-
tary dependence on the USSR as a means of persuasion. Despite the
extent of this dependence, however, the Cubans continue to maintain
cordial relations with the Chinese. The interest of the Castro regime
in militant struggle in Latin America causes it frequently to take posi-
tions consonant with those of China. We believe that Castroite revolu-
tionary doctrine will continue to conflict from time to time with the
tactics of the USSR and its Communist supporters in Cuba and, more
generally, in Latin America.

Ill. TRENDS AMONG THE NONGOVERNING COMMUNIST PARTIES

17. The image of Communist unity, together with the authority and
universality of Communist dogma, have always been of great importance
for the morale of Communists and for the appeal of their movement
to potential supporters. This has been true despite a Jong history of
factional discord. Accordingly, the existence of two distinct sources of
doctrine with conflicting precepts has caused many Communist parties
to be increasingly divided, confused, and disoriented. Many Commu-
nist leaders (like members of any political movement which is openly
split) are alarmed at the open rift, believing that it endangers their
control over their parties and damages the prospect of victory for
their cause.

18. Both the Soviets and the Chinese are actively engaged throughout
the world in attempts to proselytize party members to their views. In
this contest the Soviets still have the support of most party leaders
and organizations. Among some 90 Communist parties (including those
in power) only 11 or 12 can now be counted as members of the Chinese
“camp,” and most of these are in Asia. But the Chinese have sup-
porters among the membership of almost all parties, and Chinese
arguments raise doubts about the correctness of Soviet leadership. The
very existence of a rival Chinese line tends to weaken established parties
by providing an alternative to Soviet authority. Generally speaking,
the Chinese position has more inherent appeal to militantly revolution-
ary groups than do the more cautious Soviet tactics.

10 SECRET
Page-14
AeCRET

19. In some of the nongoverning parties the Sino-Soviet dispute has
simply accentuated longstanding factional divisions. In others it has
Jed to the breaking away or expulsion of dissident, pro-Chinese elements.
Until recently, such dissidents would normally have fallen into political
oblivion. However, they are now able to turn to the Chinese for assist-
ance and can maintain their existence as separate political centers.
Such pro-Chinese political groups now exist in a great number of
countries. Where these groups include important party leaders, they
are sometimes able to form rival Communist parties. This occurred
some time ago in Brazil, and more recently in Belgium, Australia, Para-
guay, Ceylon, Switzerland, and Mexico.

20. The Chinese, however, are not the only contenders for influence;
the Yugoslavs also play a certain role. Though they are no longer as
active as was once the case, the Yugoslavs still exercise some influence
on Communist parties and on the leftist non-Communist fringe because
their country is an example of an independent Communist state which
has developed its own unique “road” of Communist development.
Castroism also has influence among the parties; its appeal is most effec-
tive among restless Latin American revolutionaries—both Communist
and non-Communist—but it also extends to militant groups in other
areas (e.g., Zanzibar) where violence is the approved method.

21. Finally there is an assortment of left-wing radicals and revolu-
tionary leaders who, in the early stages of their consolidation of local
power, turn to the USSR or perhaps to Communist China for economic
and military support. Some work closely with the local Communists,
but others avoid or suppress them. They usually proclaim themselves
to be vaguely “Marxist,” and affirm their commitment to “socialism,”
their sympathy for the Soviet Union, and antipathy to Western “im-
perialism.” Ben Bella, Lumumba, Nkrumah, Sukarno, and Qasim are
examples of the type, which is to be observed mainly in Africa, Latin
America, and some parts of Asia. Castro came to power at least osten-
sibly as a non-Communist revolutionary, but ended by actually taking
his country into the Communist camp.

22. Such leaders are by no means reliable instruments of Moscow—not
even Castro has become that. Whatever the degree of their dependence
on Communist support, they usually insist upon a free hand for them-
selves domestically, and refuse to submit to control from the Soviet
Union or from any other foreign country. Few of them have much
understanding of Marxism, or much interest in finer points of doctrine,
but they do spread the habit of associating movements of rebellion and
protest with Marxist terminology.

23. Such leaders may elevate local, disciplined Communists to posi-
tions of influence, and may open the way to an eventual Communist
takeover by infiltration. Even when the original leaders, or men like

SHERET™ W
Page-15
‘GECRET™

them, remain in power, they may have a tendency to constitute them-
selves hangers-on of the Communist movement without being subject
to its discipline, to accept its help without giving it obedience, and
sometimes to add their own embellishments to the body of Communist
doctrine. This phenomenon presents Moscow with opportunities for
expansion of its influence and even for infiltration, but it also carries
certain dangers and the risk of sudden setbacks.

Western Europe

24. In Western Europe, as a result of general prosperity, most of the
Communist parties have to deal with a comparatively affluent and
nonmilitant proletariat, and have to devise policies which will enable
them to hold influence over the working class and to avoid becoming
isolated from political developments within their own countries. The
relaxation in East-West tensions has led West European Communist
parties to place increasing emphasis on popular front tactics. This turn
in events has favored the emergence of a new leadership in the Swedish
Communist Party that hopes to move toward a more respectable posi-
tion in Swedish politics. In France, the party is trying to broaden
local electoral alliances with the Socialists into a common front against
de Gaulle. In Italy, the party has a long tradition of adapting its
policies to local political necessity. However, its long political isolation
is now deepened by the Center-Left coalition which may make it also
difficult in the longer run for the party to claim that a genuine reform
of Italian institutions is impossible without Communist participation.

25. The Communist parties of France and Italy, both by inclination
and because of local circumstances, support Soviet views against those
of China, especially on the subjects of war and peace and the transition
to power. Most of the leaders of the smaller parties have tended to
stifle discussion of the issues, lest the dispute stimulate dissidence
among the rank-and-file. Especially within the last year, however,
pressure has increased greatly on these parties to take a position in
the dispute, with the result that dissension has occurred, and some
parties have moved to expel leftist militant elements.

Sub-Saharan Africa

26. The Republic of South Africa has a long-established Communist
Party, which is now illegal and greatly harassed by the police. Despite
certain disadvantages arising from the fact that its leadership has
been predominantly white, it has infiltrated various nonwhite political
movements and it plays a major role among elements resisting the
government’s policy of apartheid. Elsewhere south of the Sahara Com-
munist parties are few and weak; there is indeed no well-developed
Communist movement at all. . Nevertheless, there are a fair number of
Communists, and a small but gradually growing number of revolu-

12 ae
Page-16
SECRET

tionaries who have undergone training in Communist countries. In
Zanzibar a few pro-Communists gained ascendancy in the new revolu-
tionary government, operating in the framework of the Afro-Shirazi
Party, whose declared orientation is African nationalist rather than
Communist.

27. Most of the new governments of Africa are one-party regimes, or
are swiftly evolving in this direction, and it is in this context that the
Communists must operate. In some of the French-speaking countries,
for example, the generally conservative cast of.the regime may never-
theless obscure the presence of fairly radical elements, including prob-
ably some genuine Communists, at various levels. That they are indeed
present is attested by the events following President Youlou’s fall in
Congo-Brazzaville. In more left-leaning regimes—such as Ghana—
Communists may operate with considerable freedom and achieve a
good deal of influence. The “liberation movements” of southern Africa
present still a different kind of situation. By their very nature these
movements are revolutionary, and in varying degrees all of them-are
at least potentially susceptible to Communist penetration, if- only
because of their need for outside support.

28. Sino-Soviet competition has already been evident. in Africa, for
example in the Afro-Asian Peoples Solidarity Organization, and in
rivalry. for favor with the Angolan and Mozambique nationalist move-
ments. Chou-En-Lai’s recent tour of the area was a striking bid for
Chinese influence with some of the governments. The USSR’s. im-
measurably greater material resources give it a considerable advantage,
but the appeal of Chinese militancy may still be great, for example
to the liberation movements of southern Africa and perhaps to the
radical opposition in East Africa.

Latin America

29. The strength and operational conditions of the Latin American
Parties differ greatly. In some cases—e.g., Chile and Brazil—they favor
nonviolent, gradualist tactics as the most promising avenue to. power.
In others—e.g., Venezuela—the party engages in violence against the
regime, in cooperation with pro-Castro elements. “As in the rest of the
movement, the Latin American parties are affected by the Sino-Soviet
dispute.” The top leadership of all Latin American parties is pro-Soviet,
except possibly in Peru, and most parties have formally associated them-
selves with Soviet positions. However, factional quarrels have greatly
intensified in Ecuador and Peru; in Brazil, Mexico, and Paraguay rival
Communist parties exist. In addition, the Latin American parties are
subjected to the influence of Castroism, a third element which is neither
Sino nor Soviet, Castroism’s primary. appeal is to the youth and the
radical left: Castroist organizations are action-oriented groups which
in some cases supplement, and in other cases compete with the Com-

SECRET 13
Page-17
SECRer

munist parties. Unlike the Chinese, however, Castro does not seek to
take the Communist parties themselves away from Soviet control. A
fourth element is composed of a number of small Trotskyite groups
which lean toward the Chinese.

Far East

30. The Comunist parties of the Far East have tended to come under
the influence of the Chinese Party, mainly because of China’s weight
as the dominating power of the area. Most of them operate in fairly
backward countries and view China’s revolutionary method as appro-
priate for themselves. Nevertheless, the great variation in circum-
stances and strengths of the parties has produced a considerable range
in the degree of their support for the Chinese position.

31. The Communist Party of Indonesia, with a membership of over
two million, now supports China on all the major issues of the Sino-
Soviet dispute. Its feeling of affinity with China as another under-
developed Asian country is an important factor in this alignment.
Support of the Indonesian Government’s policies remains the corner-
stone of PKI strategy, and all major leaders of the party have stressed
that while the possibility of violent revolution must not be overlooked,
the PKI hopes to achieve power by other means. Impatience with this
policy apparently exists among some party members, but a militant
group advocating a change in strategy has not yet gained support of a
significant number of the party’s members and is not likely to do so
in the immediate future.

32. The Japanese Party operates in a highly industrialized environ-
ment more akin to Western Europe than to Asia. The party is small
and has to compete with a strong Marxist socialist movement. The
Japanese Party, though continuing to claim neutrality, now supports
the Chinese on all major issues. However, pro-Soviet elements still
exert some influence within the party, which still maintains ties with
Moscow.

33. In Malaysia, and to a lesser extent Thailand, the Chinese ethnic
element in the parties is strong, and the parties have a vested interest
in violence; some of China’s most loyal support comes from these very
small underground parties.Chinese influence is paramount in Burma,
but the local movement is rent by factional and personal rivalries.
In the parties of Australia and New Zealand, the Chinese have had
working in their favor the fact that the parties are small, are sympathetic
to Stalinism, and see little or no chance of achieving power except
through violent upheaval. In spite of this, however, the Soviets con-
trived to swing the Australian Party to their side; pro-Chinese elements
were expelled and have recently formed a new party. The New Zealand

14 SEGRE?
Page-18
eRe

Party, on the other hand, has resisted Soviet pressure and has become
one of the strongest supporters of the Chinese.

34. The Communist Party of India has had longstanding factional
divisions which have been greatly aggravated since policy toward the
Government of India has been a major issue in the Sino-Soviet dispute.
Opinion within the CPI now is sharply polarized between left and right,
but there are distinct subgroups within both factions, A small band
of leftist extremists identifies itself with China and agitates for an
immediate split in the CPI. The bulk of leftist sentiment, although
opposed to cooperation with the bourgeois government, is anti-Soviet
rather than pro-Chinese. Its leaders hope to dislodge the present
pro-Soviet leadership of the CPI at the Party Congress scheduled for
next October. The right-wing leadership, with the support of the
Soviets, is attempting to find a basis of cooperation with moderates
to keep the party together.

Front Organizations

35. The Sino-Soviet dispute has been reflected in Communist inter-
national front organizations for several years now, but in the past
year the controversy has become more violent. Chinese obstructionist
and undermining tactics so far have not threatened Soviet domination
of the major front organizations (such as the WPC, WFTU, WFDY, and
IUS*). However, they have destroyed any pretense of solidarity among
Communists, and have increased doubts among non-Communists
about the purpose of the organizations. For the Soviets, the effective-
hess of most of these front organizations as instruments of propaganda
has been damaged. For example, in Japan, Chinese activity has
strengthened the pro-Chinese position in Gensuikyo,’ but has badly
damaged the latter as an effective front organization. The Sino-Soviet
rivalry is also intense in the Afro-Asian People’s Solidarity Organization
(AAPSO), which is not strictly comparable to the other large Com-
munist front organizations because of the heavy representation it has
of nationalist governing parties in Africa.

36. In addition to challenging the Soviets in open meetings, the
Chinese are also using the international fronts as forums in which
to carry their ideas to African, Asian, and Latin American member
groups and leaders. While, at the moment, the Chinese are mainly
relying on bilateral contacts to achieve this end, they have also begun
to experiment with establishing fronts on their own, such as the
Afro-Asian Journalists Organization, with headquarters in Djakarta,
in which the Soviets have been relegated to observer status. Peiping

*World Peace Council, World Federation of Trade Unions, World Federation
of Democratic Youth, and the International Union of Students,

“The Japan Council Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs.

EGRET 15
Page-19
SEGREY

hopes that, despite Soviet countermoves, it will be able to use such
organizations to compete with the Soviet-controlled international fronts
in the particular areas where they believe their message is most appro-
priate and welcome. To the extent that the Chinese are successful,
these regional initiatives will put the major fronts on the defensive and
seriously challenge their carefully nurtured influence in the under-
developed areas.

IV. GENERAL IMPLICATIONS

37. During the last few years, both the USSR and Communist China
have increasingly devoted their attention and energies to combatting
each other and competing for allies and adherents. This has necessi-
tated some adjustments in other aspects of their foreign policies, The
Chinese challenge almost certainly increases Moscow’s current interest
in relaxing tensions with the Western powers, though at the same
time the Soviets may sometimes feel impelled to a militant policy
in underdeveloped areas, lest they be justifiably charged by the Chinese
with Jack of revolutionary conviction. China, having suffered greatly
from the economic sanctions imposed by the USSR since 1960, has
already been led to explore different approaches toward some major
non-Communist countries, though in this it has emphatically excepted
the US. China cannot be sure of either economic or strategic support
from the USSR, even should the defense treaty between the two powers
remain intact. In general, the aggressiveness of both China and the
USSR toward the West, at least in their direct relationships with the
major powers, seems bound to be limited in some degree by the new
situation in the Communist world. It goes without saying that the
activities of Soviet clandestine organizations against the West will not
be significantly reduced as a consequence of the rift.

38. The prospects for the Communist movement as a whole are mixed.
It has suffered a great setback already; the strength it derived from
the claim to be a universal mass movement, to possess a modern scien-
tific ideology, and to be moving toward inevitable worldwide triumph,
is seriously undermined. Some of the smaller Communist parties which
were nourished largely by this mystique may fade into political insig-
nificance. Those parties which commit their allegiance either to Moscow
or to Peiping will be exposed to reprisals, intrigues, and disruptive action
by the other side. The result will be that a number of parties will be
torn by internal struggle, and much energy will be devoted to attacking
and destroying factional rivals.

39. On the other hand, some Communist parties will benefit from
the breakup of a disciplined international movement. They will have
a wider range of choice in adopting the particular coloration they believe
most politically effective in their own national environments. They
will have the opportunity to disavow the USSR or China on specific

16 SaeREE
Page-20
Serer

occasions, and they may gain a new respectability in their own countries
by ceasing to be the mere instruments of a foreign power. In some
areas—Western Europe for example—there may be a tendency for
groups of Communist parties to develop patterns of common policy
and action, distinct from the Moscow or Peiping line, which may be
more effective in the area of their primary concern.

40. In general, therefore, we foresee the emergence of a considerable
variety of Communists, some chiefly influenced by Moscow or Peiping,
some largely autonomous. In some places, Communist parties will tend
to lose their elan. In others, they may emerge as more formidable
revolutionary organizations than before, though in such cases their
aims will probably be more oriented toward their own national circum-
stances than to the historic worldwide objectives of the international
movement.

41. It is important to recognize, moreover, that communism involves
other things than a world organization and an intricate doctrine. The
techniques of revolution, of party organization, of propaganda, of public
control, which the Communists invented or developed, will long be
serviceable to any who have the desire and the competence to use them,
and Communists will be the most effective teachers of these techniques.
Furthermore, communism, whatever its variety or international orienta-
tion, will continue to associate itself with some basic impulses common
to large sectors of mankind: the urge to rapid change, the demand for
social justice, opposition to vested interests of all descriptions. And
even though they may on occasion be as hostile to one another as the
Chinese and the Soviets now are, Communists will long retain an under-
lying enmity toward the West, if only because their convictions are in
so many respects incompatible with traditional Western concepts of
political and economic life.

42. It cannot be convincingly argued, therefore, that the disruption
of the unity of international communism is wholly favorable to the
interests and security of the US. To be sure, the view generally held
through most of the postwar period, that for all practical purposes the
world was divided into two camps, is no longer tenable. The unity
of the Communist movement has been broken, largely because of the
assertion of various and divergent national interests among the new
Communist states which came into existence after World War IJ. The
peculiar dangers and difficulties of a bipolar world are tending to dis-
appear. In conducting their relations with Communist states and
forming their policies toward revolutionary movements, the principal
non-Communist powers will probably find it increasingly advantageous
to judge each particular situation on its own merits, rather than on
the assumptions which generally prevailed when Moscow unquestionably
dominated the international movement.

SPeRET 7
Page-21
SECRET

43. Yet conflicts of interest between nations, whether Communist or
non-Communist, will not cease, and may become more various and con-
spicuous than before. Revolution, violence, and upheaval will persist,
and the likelihood of war at some level may not be appreciably reduced.
Communists will continue their advocacy of the class struggle and their
support of “wars of national liberation.” The ability of Communists,
of one or another variety, to take advantage of revolutionary situations
may not be significantly reduced; in some instances it will probably in-
crease. The instability of the underdeveloped world may become greater
as the alternative revolutionary affiliations open to governments and
political groups in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and elsewhere become
more numerous. In short, the fragmentation of the world Communist
movement is one of the principal developments contributing to the in-
creasing diversity and complexity of the current world situation. It
offers new opportunities and advantages to Western policy, but it pre-
sents new dangers and difficulties as well.

18 GEGRET
Page-22
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for
the Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of
the Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

£. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

‘A. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-
Sified: hORQEiieEEOMEY

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-23
