
Page-1
_ Seger

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

PROSPECTS FOR INTERNATIONAL
AIR TRANSPORT

ore 1448 (IA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
Published on RELEASE IN FULL. -

26 MARCH 1948

COPY NO.75
FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
FOK REPORTS AND ESTI¥ATES
oo!

SECRET
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army
¢. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
€.

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

>

2, This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.
Page-3
ORE 14-48

 

PROSPECTS FOR INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORT
SUMMARY

The danger that the UK will split with the US on international air policy now seems
less acute (in spite of heated debate within the UK Government regarding future
Policy) than it did immediately after the failure of the Geneva Conference in November
1947 to adopt a multilateral civil air transport agreement. Nevertheless, in the absence
of a multilateral agreement, the structure of international air transport will remain
unstable and susceptible to deterioration, because contracting parties can demand rene-
gotiation of existing bilateral agreements at any time and can cancel them on due
notice. The weaker air transport countries will continue to seek to limit commercial
air operations of foreign long-range carriers in order to Protect their own air lines,
US-UK collaboration in foreign air policy, however, if continued, will frequently be able
to impose liberal principles on other countries in situations sufficiently important to
justify political pressure at high levels.

 

Note: The information in this report is as of 2 March 1948, at which time it was submitted to the
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and Air Force for con-
currence or substantial dissent.

The Inteiligence Organization of the Department of State, the Office of Naval Intelligence,
and the Air Intelligence Division, USAF, have concurred in the report; the Intelligence
Division, Department of the Army, had no comment.
Page-4
uff

PROSPECTS FOR INTERNATIONAL AIR TRANSPORT

1, US-UK Cooprration in INTERNATIONAL AIR Poricy.

In February 1946 the US and UK agreed at Bermuda mutually to recognize the
principles of fair and equal opportunity to engage in air commerce under competitive
conditions. This agreement was further extended, in September of the same year, in an
understanding that both countries follow a common policy of inserting in their air
agreements with other powers the principle of “Fifth Freedom.” This principle (the
right to pick up or put down air traffic in territory of the other country destined for or
originating in a third country) is essential to the US if long-range operations are to pay
their own way. As a result of combined US-UK efforts, more than thirty other coun-
tries have accepted “Fifth Freedom” in agreements with either the US or UK and many
have adopted the “Bermuda” formula in their negotiation of air agreements with other
countries,

2. PRESENT INSTABILITY OF WoRLD AIR AGREEMENTS.

In spite of wide acceptance of the “Bermuda” formula, the structure of bilateral
agreements throughout the world remains unstable, as bilateral agreements are liable
to renegotiation or termination upon due notice. Had the right to “Fifth Freedom”
traffic been incorporated in a multilateral treaty at Geneva in November 1947, the pat-
tern of world air transport would have crystallized on lines permitting long-range inter-
national aviation to develop with the minimum of restriction. The conference at
Geneva failed in its purpose because, though they were willing to concede these princi-
ples in bilateral agreement with countries of their choice, many countries were unwill-
ing for political or economic reasons to concede them on a multilateral basis.

3. ATTITUDE oF THE LESSER AIR TRANSPORT COUNTRIES.
The restrictionist countries oppose a multilateral treaty for the following reasons:

a. Fear on the part of weaker countries that competition with the world’s
most experienced and powerful air carriers would, in practice, result in the eventual
elimination of their own air services;

b. Insistence by many countries on a proprietary right to traffic originating
in their own territory;

ce. Belief, on the part of some countries, that unrestricted competition for
the world’s airways offers a potential source of international friction, and that interna-
tional air transportation should be operated with a pool of aircraft by an international
organization; and,

d. Preference for the bilaterai type air agreement as affording greater lati-
tude in bargaining.

Having demonstrated at Geneva their collective ability to defeat US-UK aims, these
countries are now encouraged to renew attempts to restrict special areas for the benefit
of their own air carriers. For example, Argentina is attempting to reserve the air
traffic of its neighbors to the air lines of the region and to exclude long-range carriers
from local “Fifth Freedom” benefits. The strategically located Arab League States (al-

2 . sigfl
Page-5
SE!

though in some cases granting “Fifth Freedom” to the US in return for other considera-
tions) have made plain their desire to limit local interstate air traffic to their own air
lines. Mexico has flatly denied to the UK any traffic available at Mexico City for desti-
nations to the South. China is willing to accord “Fifth Freedom” rights to other
countries in exceptional cases only.

4. Prospects ror Continuep US-UK COLLABORATION.

Failure to stabilize fundamental principles of international aviation through a
multilateral treaty has increased the importance to the US of the present US-UK policy
of mutual support.

The future of British civil aviation is now the subject of intense debate within the
government, and strong pressures are being exerted to force a modification of UK air
policy. The issue has been brought to a head by the basic “Fly British” policy requiring
use of available aircraft even though proved to be unsuitable for commercial operations.
While this has afforded protection for the entrenched British aircraft industry, it has
also resulted in critical operating losses ($40 million in the last fiscal year). The Civil
Aviation Act of 1946 requires that subsidies for the nationalized air lines decrease
Progressively after 1948; yet the prospects are that greater subsidies will be needed to
retain present services in view of growing operating deficits. The government now must
choose its course of action from the following: (a) a further drastic reduction of air
services (this would meet the public clamor for economies in air-line operations); (b)
amendment to the Civil Aviation Act authorizing subsidies at the present or increased
rates, thus permitting continuation of all air services required by national prestige; or
(c) acquisition of modern US air transports. (The US has offered particularly advan-
tageous terms to the UK for the purchase of Constellations and C-54’s; the Dutch and
Scandinavians have demonstrated that these aircraft can produce profits.)

If the UK is impelled to initiate drastic retrenchment in its air services, it may
depart gradually from the liberal objectives of present US-UK air policy and have
recourse to agreements with other countries providing for a pooling of resources with
arbitrary division of traffic and, therefore, less onerous competitive operations. The UK,
however, might be reluctant to make such a move if it should result in an accelerated
trend toward world-wide limitation of commercial air rights, anticipating strong US
objection to restriction of US long-range air operations. Legislative authorization
for increased subsidies for the nationalized British air lines is not likely to be obtained
at this time. A move to purchase efficient US air transports, on the other hand, would
be vigorously resisted by the politically powerful British aircraft industry.

It appears probable that in this dilemma the British Cabinet will: (1) relax its
support of the UK air industry to the extent of permitting use of US transports
during the next few years on the more important routes; (2) direct the controlled
UK aircraft industry to concentrate on a research and development program of
advanced types for future use, thus continuing a degree of financial support, but ter-
minating the expensive and unsatisfactory efforts of the UK aircraft industry to produce
interim-type air transport; and’(3) insist that harmonious air transport relations with
the US be maintained at all costs.
Page-6
f

A British decision to continue US-UK cooperation in international air Policy would
be a powerful aid to the US in preserving world conditions favorable to international
aviation. It would also be a strong deterrent to a war of subsidies between countries
operating their air lines as instruments of national Prestige. Although these countries
may be able to demand or withhold concessions on relatively minor issues, they will fre-
quently be unable to deny rights to the US and UK if the issues are sufficiently important
to warrant strong combined US-UK pressure at high levels,
Page-7
DISTRIBUTION

‘The President.

Secretary of State.

Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief

“Becretary of Defense

Secretary of the Army

Secretary of the Navy

Secretary of the Air Force

Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Chairman, National Security Resources Board

-Chtet of Staff, US Army

Chief of Naval Operations

Chiet of Staff, US Air Force _

Director of Plans and Operations, Genéral Staff, US Army
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations)

Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force

aoe eaaee an tamctary of State, Research and Intelligence
Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army

Chief of Naval Intelligence ,

Director of Intelligence, US Air Force

Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group

Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Als Force Coordinating Committee
Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission
” Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission

Chief, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State

\
Page-8
U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
2300-81048