
Page-1
“ Lh, ae, ray 22.65

CONTROLED DISSEM 22 April 1965

 

Re rays

*s pe

Docuing, ot #2

 

Ly
vy

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 23-65

 

Prospects for West German
Foreign Policy

e Concurred In by thes.
UNITED} STATES INTELLIGENCE’ BOARD

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
JULY "1994
Page-2
p<

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:
The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, AEC, and NSA.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
The Atomic Ener¢ selon Representative to the
ai Saculty Agency

 
   

 

Director of the Hui

“bs.aining:

The Assistant to the (2+
outside of his juris

 

r, Federal bureau of Investigation, the subject bi.

 

WARNING

This material contains Information affecting the Natlonal Defense of the United States

 

GROUP |
Excluded from automatic
+» downgrading and
~-_ declassification
Page-3
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 23-65

Prospects for West German
Foreign Policy
Page-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM

 

CONCLUSIONS
DISCUSSION
|. GENERAL

Implications of the 1965 Election

TH. THE OUTLOOK FOR FOREIGN POLICY
General Considerations
Relations with the Major Western Allies
Defense and Nuclear Polici

Relations with the Communist World
Policy Toward Other Areas

 

HL. LONGER RANGE POSSIBILITIES

Page

uw

Ka dH

10
Page-5
a

PROSPECTS FOR WEST
GERMAN FOREIGN POLICY

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the principal trends in West German foreign policy
during the next two years or so,

CONCLUSIONS

A, West German leaders are becoming increasingly impatient to
adopt a more self-reliant, distinctively German, foreign policy. Con-
scious of their country’s growing economic and military strength,
they are eager to attain a more influential position within the West-
em Alliance and a greater share in the formulation of Western defense
and nuclear policies. At the same time, they are anxious to impart
momentum, if necessary on their own, toward the reunification of
their country. Whatever the outcome of the national election this
fall, we believe that during the next two vears or so these tendencies
will be reflected in a more assertive stvle and some differences of
emphasis in foreign policy. Nevertheless, barring important external
developments, the West German government will probably be con-
strained by practical considerations—notahly the rigidity of the power
relationship in Europe—from making any major changes in the basic
lines of policy. (Paras, 1-11)

 

B. Specifically, we believe that West Germany will retain its
present commitments in Europe and the Western Alliance for the
period of this estimate, and will continue to depend on US nuclear
power to protect the integrity of its borders and those of West Berlin,
Though we expect sympathy to grow for de Gaulle’s idea of “Europe
for the Europeans,” with some accompanying interest in a European
nuclear force, West Germany’s strong defense ties with the US will

 

almost certainly prevent a significant shift away from present defense
policy during the next two vears or so, (Paras. 12-19)

De
Page-6
oe

C. In policy toward the Communist world the new West German
administration will be likely to make more vigorous attempts than
its predecessor to take the initiative. This will almost certainly in-
clude further efforts to expand the West German position in Eastern
Europe. It may alsa he reflected in moves to resolve the German
question hy direct discussions with the Soviet leaders and additional
steps to “normalize” relations with East Germany, Yet substantial
progress in any of these spheres is unlikely unless an important shift
oceurs in Soviet policy toward Germany; a marked acceleration in
the trend toward independence or internal “liberalization” in Eastern
Europe could also open up new opportunities for West Germany in
the area. (Paras. 20-23)

D. Beyond the period of this estimate, we believe the potentiality
for important changes in West German foreign policy will increase.
In the event of rapid or fundamental changes outside Germany—e.g,,
in the Communist world or the Western Alliance—West German
leaders may find themselves in a position to act independently in a
way which would importantly affect the interests of their allies,
favorably or adversely, For example, if the Soviets eventually are
forced by events to reassess their position in Europe, this might open
the way for a West German-Soviet agreement to resolve the German
question at the expense of the East German regime and perhaps of
Bonn’s Western allies. Or future West German leaders might be
tempted to seek to exploit popular frustration over the absence of
visible movement toward reunification and might thus tend to revive
German chauvinism and the appeal of a boisterous and intolerant
extremism.’ (Paras, 26-28)

* The Director of Intelligence and Research. Department of State, feels that this Conclusion

does not adequately represent either the negutive or positive possibilities over the longer
term. In particular, it faila to note such powihle favorable developments as a post-de Gaulle

softening of French opposition toward European integration, significant progress toward
reunification consistent with US interests in a changed international contest, continuing eca-
Romic prosperity, and especially the attraction of a strong politicnl-military tie to the US,
Moreover, the Conclusion omity such critically important adverse possibilities (mentioned
in Para, 27) as major disturbances in Allance relations, which could cause Bonn to reapen
fundamental questions of defense policy,
Page-7
ove

DISCUSSION
|, GENERAL

1. West Germany is in a period of growing restiveness aver foreign policy,
Increasingly, West Germans are finding that the assumptions and goals of the
Adenauer era are ne longer appropriate to changing world conditions, and
thev are taising searching questions about the future. In the days of Adenauer
the principal objectives of foreign policy were to contain Communist expan-
sionism and ta cooperate with the Western powers in the rebuilding of Western
Europe and the creation of an integrated defensive alliance. Partly because
some of Adenaner's objectives were attained and partly hecause the nature of
German problems has changed. foreign policy objectives under Erhard are
much more difficult ta define, The Germans themselves. gavernment and
people alike, have nat succeeded in defining them. This is a period of search
for new definitions and new formulas.

2. West Germany has long since passed the phase of postwar reconstruction.
It is now a major economic power and a major partner in the Western Alliance.
Its econamy ix thriving and growing at a rapid rate? Tt makes a larger con-
tribution to the conventional defensive forces of the Western Alliance than any
other European power, Conscious of this growing strength, West Germans
desire more and more to exercise ppropriately greater influence within the
Alliance, Members of a new generation are heginning to acquire positions of
influence: increasingly these people, and especially the younger generation after
them. are coming to resent being identified with the Nazi regime, and feel that
now, some 20 years after World War II, they should he entitled to look to the
future instead ‘of being incessantly embroiled in the past.

3, At the same time, West Germans are becoming increasingly aware that
in changing world circumstances the interests of their country and those of
their major allies do not always coincide. There is growing impatience over
what is regarded as excessive dependence on others in foreign policy, especially
in areas not of major importance ta West Germany. Indeed, what is happen-
ing is a burgeoning of nationalist feeling, not in the sense associated with the
Nazi or even earlier periods, but in the sense that West Germans now desire
that their government should follow a mare self-reliant, distinctively German,
policy, In this they are influenced by the example of de Gaulle.

4. As the Germans look enstward, the Communist world no longer presents
so menacing an image as it did in the Adenauer era. There is less sense of
immediate threat, and more awareness of oppartnnities developing from the
rifts ond ferment within the Communist world, The Bonn government has

 

“In 1964 the economy achieved a real GNP growth rate of seven percent, which doubled
that of the previous yenr, Full employment t# heing muintained, and Bonn expects a growth
tate this yeur almost ay high ae luvt. West Germany have never enjayed such prosperity,

oe :
Page-8
Po

taken steps to establish a modest position in Eastern Enrape. in the form. of
trade missions. which jt hopes will he a wedge for greater influence. Mean-
while, German concern aver the division af the country. which has heen present
from the beginning, has become more evident and increased in intensity ever
since the erection of the Berlin Wall i 1961, Though most Germans realize
that the likelihood of reunification iy remote. they still wish to he assured that
progress: toward the common goal ix not heing shirked. Many West Germans
have since concluded that in a situation of nuclear stalemate they could not
rely on their allies to make the desired progress for them. but wauld have to
take steps on their own, Largely in response to the initiatives of Willy Brandt,
a number of “small steps” have heen taken by the Bonn government to improve
contacts with East Germans. In general, West Germans convinced of the
necessity to maintain movement in eastern policy. lest they give the impression
that they accept the status quo and are no longer particularly interested in the
reunification of their country,

   

  

 

 

   

   

5. Nevertheless, there are still very strong factors: which restrict West Ger-
man independent initiatives, Despite the diminished sense of immediate threat,
the West Germans remain greatly concerned aver the vulnerability. of their
eastern border. Their desire ta have strong US military forces: stationed on
German soil for protection is as firm as ever: indeed. there is grout sensitivity
to any suggestion that the US might withdraw even small units of its forces.
There is now a close and complex relationship hetween the armed forces of
West Germany and the US which would inhibit rapid or radical changes in
detense policy and planning. Another limitation upon independent action is
the growing practical involvement. of West Germany in the Common Market
and ather West Europeun cooperative endeavors, Other factors which inhibit
change in foreign policy or divert attention from it are domestic prosperity,
Growing social and econamic integration in German society. and the consensus
of responsible leaders in hoth majer political parties on the main outlines of
West German foreign policy,

  

 

 

Implications of the 1965 Election

8. West Germany is now preparing for a national election to he held on
19 September 1963, the outcome af which could have u significant effect on the
style and emphasis of foreign policy during the next year or two, The most
likely outcome, we believe, is that the German electorate will return to power
an administration led hy the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and its
Bavarian affiliate, the Christian Social Union (CSU), which. ax now, is likely
to depend for its majority on conlition with the Free Demacratic Party (FDP),
Tn any case. the Adenaner-Strauss wing of the CDU/CSU will probably renew
its pressure for a more “European” orientation in policy, A substantially re-
duced plurality would probably he interpreted hy the party leaders as calling
for a mare assertive leadership, Fighting for survival. the small FDP has al-
ready chosen to press for a more radical policy, especiully toward the east. as
the main plank of its electoral platform.

4 Sat
Page-9
Re

7. However. for the first time in its histary the Social Democratic Party (SPD)
has a chance of gaining a plurality. which would entitle it to try to form a
gavernment. TF it suceeeded. it would he equally inclined to seck to revitalize
West Germany's policies. The SPD leaders probably would interpret an clee-
tion victory as a mandate for a more energetic policy toward the Communist
world, Especially toward East Germany. an SPD administration probably
would feel relatively unencumbered hy previous practices and principles such as
the Hallstein Doctrine’ It probably would develop closer ties with the East
Germans and in time possihly even with the Communist regime, Many of the
present: problems world remain in relations with West Germany's European
allies. ulthongh the SPD leaders have close connections with fellaw Socialists,
especially in the Scandinavian countries,

 

 

S. Ut is possible. though much loss likely. that a “grand coalition” will be
formed between the CDU/CSU and the SPD after the election, Tn such an
event. the administration will possess un averwhelming parliamentary majority,
so that there will he a greater surface appearance of stability in foreign policy,
Nevertheless, even such a government would he subjected to increased pressure
far a new, more independent stvle in policy. Competition and maneuver be-
tween and within the twa parties would continue. If the FDP were excluded
from effective influence over national policy. it could became a focus for dis-
contented radicals and nationals, Such an opposition would probably try
to rally support by eshuming and reviving German grievances which’ have
accumulated since World War W—e.g.. alleged unpunished Allied “war crimes.”
and the division of Germany at Allied hands. This kind of appeal would be
likely to evoke some popular response. but we do not think it would have an
important elfect on foreign policy for the next few years.

 

 

 

Il. THE OUTLOOK FOR FOREIGN POLICY

General Considerations

9. We believe that the outcome of the election, whatever it may be, is un-
likely ta bring about fundamental change in West German foreign policy during
the next few years, West German leaders will try to adopt at least the appear-
ance of a more independent line, so that changes in style und emphasis can be
¢xpected, But for some years the Federal Republic will be constrained by
practical considerations—natably the rigidity of the power relationship in
Europe—trom making radical changes in the substance of its policy. Only in
the event of important developments outside Germany would an important shift
in West German foreign paliey be likely to occur during the period of this
estimate,

  

 

10, Popular sentiment in West Germany does not now actively favor funda-
mental changes in policy. Quite the contrary. most West Germans are pre-
occupied with the enjoyment of their ‘nprecedented prosperity; their principal

 

The Hallstein Doctrine culls for the severance af relations with any nation, other than
the USSR. which recognizes: East Germany.
Page-10
soe

concern is to protect it, Foreign policy does not figure importantly as an elec-
ton issue, To he sure, there is widesprend popular disapproval of Erhard’s
“bumbling,” in contrast ta Adenauer's frm and decisive leadership. but. for the
most part, there is general approval of the present orientation of foreign policy.
No organized element naw exists in German society with the disruptive influ-
ence which characterized the militarist and hig business blocs af Weimar da
Foreign policy in West Germany now is principally the concern of politicians
and “opinion moulders,” whe know which issues are likely to evake popular
response in suppart of particular policy: lines,

 

 

 

LL, Remnification is of special significance, Additional interest in. this issue
hus been stimulated recently in connection with the election campaign. Each
of the political parties tries to manipulate it to its own advantage. Willy Brandt
has used his position as Governing Mayor af West Berlin ta exploit it on behalf
of his party, The FDP leaders have staked their political future on a play for
a more active policy toward reunification, The Erhard administration feels
compelled to appear to he trying to make progress toward the goal, Though
there is currently no widespread popular demand for an immediate solution,
reunification nevertheless remains the key national issue in Germany. Active
interest could he greatly intensified if it appeared ta Germans on hoth sides of
the border that there were improved practical possibilities for achieving it.

Relations with the Major Western Allies

12, We believe that West Germany will remain committed to an “Atlantic”
orientation for the period af this estimate. will maintain close ties with the US
and with its other NATO allies. and will continue to press for increasingly close
economic and political ties among the Common Market countries, At a mini-
mum. the continued need and desire for US protection af West Germany and
West Berlin will prevent any significant shift in the next few years,

13. At the same time, West German leaders are confronted with a dilemma
arising from the fact that close ties with France are also essential to Germany's
goals in Europe and to further progress toward European integration, We he-
lieve that there will be growing sympathy amang West German leaders for
de Gaulle’s idea of “Europe for the Europeans.” This tendency will he espe-
cially significant if as a result of the 1068 election, the "Gaullist” wing of the
CDU/CSU acquires greater influence within the government. But we believe
that any Bonn government will seek to avoid situations which require a choice
between the US and France. In the event of an administration led hy the CDU.
de Gaulle will continue to exert a strong influence aver German policy since he
can create serious difficulties for West German policymakers, especially in inter-
allied relations, and can deepen divisions within the CDU/CSU itself. An
administration dominated by the SPD would probably be less sympathetic to
de Gaulle but still it could nat avoid heing preaccupied with his uctions.
Relations with France will therefore probably he troubled. regardless af which
party holds power after the clection,

6 et

 

 

OO
Page-11
~—<

14. Relations with the UK will probably continue to be hampered by basic
differences on key issues, though intermittent atmospheric improvement may be
expected, since hath governments have an interest in bettering their relationship.
Various differences hetween the two countries will surface from time to time.
the most profound of which will concern Germany's role in Europe and in the
Wester Alliance, West German leaders believe that Britain does not support
their national interests (e.g. on reunification) and is lukewarm toward German
aspirations for a larger role in NATO councils. In the event that the West
German election should bring an SPD administration into power, relations with
the Labour Government prahably will improve somewhat, since there are some
close personal ties hetween individuals in the two parties, Improvement would
also result from progress toward a mutually satisfactory version of the Atlantic
Nuclear Force (ANF) proposed hy the British, or a suitable alternative.

Defense and Nuclear Policies

15. We believe that West Germany's heavy reliance on US protection will
remain the heart of its defense and nuclear policies. The West Germans will
continue to urge, however, that the present US strategy of “flexible response”
he interpreted to allow almost immediate use of nuclear wwerpons for the pro-
tection of West German territory, West German leaders will also press for a
larger voice in the determination of NATO defensive strategy and in the control
of the West's nuclear deterrent.

16. This continuing concern was an important factor in the discussion of the
proposal for a Multilateral Nuclear Force (MLF); it continues to operate in
the discussion of nuclear defense arrangements which now centers upon the
Atlantic Nuclear Force (ANF). The outlook for agreement on such a force is
not bright, partly because of British-German differences, hut particularly be-
cause the Germans and others are anxious ta avoid a confrontation with
de Gaulle over the question. If there is no progress on current proposals,
German policymakers will probably look for other sharing arrangements; failure
to achieve any form of sharing may lead them eventually to consider alternative
nuclear policies,

17, Some leading West German politicians—e.g,, Adenauer, Strauss, and
Krone—have expressed themselves as favoring the development of a European
nuclear force. Such individuals sympathize with de Gaulle’s stated view that
the US cannot be relied upon indefinitely to come to Europe's defense in a
crisis, They advance the argument that the credibility of the Western nuclear
deterrent would be enhanced by the presence in Western Europe of a nuclear
force under European control, incorporating the French force de frappe. If as a
result of the West German election the “Gaullist” wing of the CDU/CSU should
obtain a more influential position, the government may come under some
pressure to explore the possibilities of this scheme, We believe, however, that
the West German leadership in the main does not regard the creation of such a
force as a realistic objective. Perhaps more important, most German leaders

ot ?
Page-12
p<

would continue to consider essential the intimate involvement of the US in any
nuclear arrangement.

18. A bilateral French-German arrangement for nuclear defense {s highly
unlikely during the period of this estimate. The Germans will not want to
jeopardize their close relationship with the US hy such an arrangement. and
in any case. we believe that de Gaulle will not permit the Germans a mean-
ingful share in a joint nnelear program, Considerable cooperation already
exists between the twa countries in various military fields (though far less than
that between West Germany and the US), but we have no evidence of any
collaboration relating to nuclear wenpons, It is possible that the Germans. in
return for some important advantage, would agree to u French request for
financial support for the force de frappe. We doubt this, because we see no
adequate advantage which the West Germans would be likely to receive from
the French at present that would compensate for the risk of undermining Ger-
many’s relations with the US,

18. We believe that there is little disposition in West Germany at present
to acquire a national nuclear weapons capability. Over the next several years,
to the extent that their desires for a greater role appear to the Germans to be
frustrated, sentiment for an independent nuclear capability will probably in-
crease to some extent, But all responsible West German leaders at present
reject such a course. and there continue to he strong political factors, including
the Bonn government's treaty commitments, which deter West Germans from
a national nuclear weapons program. We helieve it highly unlikely that they
will begin to develop such a program during the period of this estimate.

Relations with the Communist World

20. Whatever the outcome of the 1965 election, we believe that the new
administration in Bonn will try ta develop initiatives in eastern policy, if neces-
sary independently of its Western allies. It will continue to urge its allies to
press the Soviets to abandon their rigid opposition to reunification, If the
allies prove unresponsive to this pressure, or if their efforts are blacked by the
Soviets, West German leaders will intensify their exploration of alternative
approaches to the prohlem. This might result in direct talks with the Soviets,
further moves to improve the German positian in Eastern Europe, or additional
Toves to normalize West German relations with East Germany; or it could
result in all three together. There will probably he a continuing tendency to
look for practical accommodations of policy regardless of political restrictions—
such as agreements for greater movement of Germans in both directions across
the zonal border. An SPI) administration would prahably accelerate imple-
mentation of such a policy, especinlly if its coalition partner were the activist
FDP.

21, But Bonn’s eastern policy operates under severe constraints, und unless
important external developments should occur, we believe that progress will
not be spectacular, A fundamental change in Soviet policy toward Germany

8 De
Page-13
Rs

would at any time be likely to find positive response in Bonn, but we see no
praspect of such 4 change during the period of this estimate. West German
progress toward rapprochement with East Germany probably will be limited,
ut least to the extent that the Soviets regard it as likely to endanger the stability
of the Communist regime. We expect further West German steps to improve
relations, despite repeated demonstration of the Communist intention to use
these steps to enhance the status of the East German regime at Bonn’s expense.

 

In Eastern Europe, it is conceivable that sudden developments—for
example. a marked acceleration of the trend toward independence or toward
internal liberalization—could open up new opportunities for enhancing West
German influence in the area, which any West German administration would
he quick to exploit, But in the absence of such developments, we believe
that the West German government will continue to improve its relations with
these countries at a gradual pace. Issues such as the Oder-Neisse question
continue to present serious obstacles to the normalization af Bonn's relations
with Eastern Europe. The impression continues to prevail in the countries of
this area that the West Germans still have designs on their former eastern
territories,

23. Policy toward China is another area where Bonn will probably attempt a
more assertive line than in the past. The Bonn government, under whatever
leadership, probably will be less deterred by US susceptibilities than its prede-
cessor in establishing trade relations with Peiping. Bonn’s principal interest
in such a te is that it may be able to obtain a trade agreement with China
including a Berlin clause, which Bonn could use in its maneuvering against
the Ulbricht regime Trade considerations are secondary, but not unimportant.
To some extent Bonn will be influenced by the example of de Gaulle. How-
ever, the West Germans seem to believe that such actions will not be construed
by the US asa major break in Western solidarity.

Policy Toward Other Areas

24. West Germany's national interests are less directly involved in other areas
of the world, and Bonn’s foreign Policy is less actively engaged in these areas.
But the government and West German business interests are Greatly interested
in trade with the underdeveloped world, and the West Germans have developed
a fairly extensive economic aid Program. Bonn’s major concern with respect to
these areas is to maintain its position as the sole spokesman for the German
people, and to sustain the diplomatic isolation of the Ulbricht regime. How-
ever, this policy, which is epitomized by the Hallstein Doctrine, has become
increasingly dificult to maintain as more and more nations, many of them newly
independent, have been subjected to Communist pressure and influence. Recent
troubles with Indonesia, Tanzania, and the UAR have caused West German

 

‘The Berlin clause refers to the inclusion of West Berlin in the aren covered by the trade
agreement. The East German regime maintain that West Berlin hay no legitimate tie to the
Federal Republic.
Page-14
Ps

pet be phice this poliey principle under searching examination. They are
hore hether to retain it. abandan it, or modify it.

 

Yet tern policy toward the Middle East, an area of more thin ordi-
oe Croman uterest. hits heen greatly: complicated hy Bonn’s invalvement in
fal baseh coutlicl largely as a result. of its peculiar relationship with
feet titans handling of all the problems arising out af the Ulbricht visit
eotcate aid Kons halting af military nid to Israel was widely criticized hy
He German public as extremely inept diplomacy, and he eventually
vopecded to pressure fora harder line against the Arabs, It is widely believed
eV eT Corian Tht one of the hasic causes of its troubles in the Middle East

ethe Vdlenaner ‘tice of follawing US policy. guidance. notably in the
vement with Israel, West German policy in the Middle East is
nee Teh ta ceflect specifically German political and economic interests to a
rowan device than before, Bonn is ne longer likely to apply a uniform policy
(ete Arch countries. and the camplesities of the problem may result in at least
cm modiheation of the Hallstein Doctrine. More braadly, recent events will
vobabh increase West German wariness toward political commitments. or
‘Hes cathes in disputes. in regions of tension outside the aren of NATO,

  

 

cet anne. ag

 

LONGER RANGE POSSIBILITIES *

‘© Though we have estimated that no important changes in West German
mena poles are likely during the next twa years ar so, we believe that de-
lopment. in the world situation will considerably increase the potentiality for
choanee alter that For many years Bonn's foreign policy was relatively quiescent
vl Largely dependent on the foreign policies of others, but in recent years
ha hepon ta move, and in Nears to came we expect it to gather momentum.
Oo the other hand, habits af constitutional government. which have found
mubcover tle past 20 years, should tend to impede sudden shifts in foreign
jeley without careful governmental reflection and considerable national debate.
cnher factors inhibiting sudden change are West Germany's deep-seated fear
Fthe Soviet Union and its intense drive for reconciliation with Western Europe,

"Tut in the event of rapid ar fundamental change outside Germmy—e.g,,
the USSK, in Sino-Soviet or US-Soviet relations, Eastern Europe, the EEC,
» NATO--West German leaders may find themselves in a position to take
rdependent action ina way which would have an important effect on the
terest of their allies, either favorable or adverse, If the Soviets are eventually
iced by events to reassess their position in Ewope, this might open the way
faa West’ German-Soviet Agreement to resolve the German question at the
‘pense of the East German regime and perhaps of Bonn's Western allies. A

 

 

“the Director of Jntelligence gnd Research, Depurtinent of State, feels that this section
“mat adequately represent the positive possibilities aver the longer term. In particular,
fails to note such possible favargble developments as postede Gaulle softening of French
opposition toward ppean integration, significant Prouress toward reunification consistent
sah OS interests i a changed international contest, continuing economic prosperity, and
s prerally the attraction of a strong politicul-military tie to the US.

" ae
Page-15
a

major disruption of the Western Alliance—far example, through a French deci-
sion to leave NATO——could cause the West Germans to reassess their entire
position on defense policy. Evidence that the US intended to bring about a
substantial reduction of its commitments in Europe would certainly cause such
a reassessment, and strong domestic pressure might then arise for the adoption
of a national nuclear weapons program.

28, External developments could also affect opinion inside West Germany in
a way which would not be to the advantage of the US or Bonn’s other allies,
Future West German leaders might he tempted to seek to exploit popular
frustration over the absence of visible movement toward reunification and might
thus tend to revive German chauvinism and the appeal of a boisterous and
intolerant extremism. It is also possible that external events could cause
neutralist feeling in West Germany ta grow, In time. and especially if the
sense of direct Soviet threat to Western Europe continues to diminish, the West
Germans’ conviction that NATO is essential for their security could weaken,
Conceivably even the necessity for the continued presence of American fore
on German soil might eventually he put in ¢ question.
Page-16
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

; . 1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
e | for the Information and use af the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the

following officials within thelr respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

€. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department af the Army

d. Astistont Chlef of Naval Cparations (Intelligence), fer the Deportment of the
Magy

e. Atsistors Chief of Stefi. | vhiaence, USAF, for the Dapartoe nt of the Air
Force

f, Director of Intelliganca, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Comaissicn

@ Aaslstant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Invastigation

h. Diractor of NSA, for the National Security Agency

|, Asshtant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
- Agency

 

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

2. This document may be retained, or. destroyed by burning In accordance. with
applicable security regulations, o: returned to the Central Intelligenca Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document Is disseminated overseas, the overseas reclplents. may
retaln ft for q perlod nat in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding ‘agency to retain It In accordance. with
1AC-D-69/2,' 22 June 1953, : " :

 

  
 

 

Atomle Energy Commission
Federal Bureau: of Investigation