
Page-1
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

PROSPECTS FOR INTERNATIONALIZATION
OF AIR TRANSPORT

   

 

sear tng CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL
€ONABEN THA
B200%97
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

|. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other

Department or Agency

ease

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

  
  
    
 
  

This document contains infor
defense of the United State:
Espionage Act, 50 USe., 3
mission or the revela
an unauthorized

fecting the national
the meaning of the
amended. Its trans-
Page-3
ORE 40-48 GORPIDENTIAL

PROSPECTS FOR INTERNATIONALIZATION OF AIR TRANSPORT

SUMMARY

Internationalization of civil aviation embracing international air transport opera-
tions throughout the world, under one or more operating organizations is scheduled for
debate at the 1 June Second Assembly of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO). While it is unlikely that such a far-reaching plan will receive favorable
consideration, it is probable that the discussions will carefully explore the formation
of regional pools of air transport companies designed to centralize direction and effect
economies.

Consideration of this subject by ICAO will probably advance the formation of a
regional pool for the air lines of Western Europe; it may also promote similar action
by countries in the Near East, South America, and Australasia. US long-range air-car-
riers will be affected by the increased competition of regional air transport pools.
Furthermore, an attempt by regional pools or other international groups controlling
world routes to deny US air lines important traffic rights, could threaten the present
US preeminence in long-range commercial aviation.

If the US encounters a threat to its present strong position in international air
transport and is willing to exert pressure on foreign countries at high governmental
levels, these countries will generally hesitate to discriminate against US air lines.

Note: The information in this report is as of 15 May 1948.
The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Navy, and Air Force have con-
curred in this report. The Intelligence Division, Department of the Army, submitted no
comment. .
Page-4
PROSPECTS FOR INTERNATIONALIZATION OF AIR TRANSPORT

Internationalization of civil aviation embracing all international air transport
operations throughout the world under one or more operating organizations will be
debated at the forthcoming Second Assembly of the International Civil Aviation Or-
ganization (ICAO) which convenes 1 June at Geneva.

1. Conprtions GENERATING PRESSURE FOR INTERNATIONALIZATION.

With few exceptions, the major air lines flying international routes have encoun-
tered increasing operating deficits despite an increase in air travel. The principal
factors which contribute to these difficulties are the high cost of equipment, service
and repair facilities, and the degree of technical proficiency required for operation of
long-range air services. Many countries are reluctant to continue indefinitely un-
economical competition for the present limited amount of air traffic and are unwilling
to provide the excessive subsidies which have become essential to the maintenance of
their air lines. They are, therefore, receptive to a solution which would reduce costs
and permit the continued operations which they desire for reasons of national policy
and prestige.

2.  Sreps Previousty UNDERTAKEN To PROMOTE INTERNATIONALIZATION.

The concept of a single international organization to operate services on the
world’s trunk air routes has long been held by a number of countries now engaged in
international air transport operations. As a result, the Chicago Convention of 1944,
to which all ICAO members are signatory, specifically states that nothing in the Con-
vention shall prevent two or more contracting States from constituting joint air trans-
port operating organizations and international operating agencies, or from pooling
their air services on any routes or in any regions. The Convention even permits the
ICAO Council to suggest to contracting States that they form joint organizations.

In the summer of 1947, the First General Assembly of ICAO instructed the ICAO
Council to ask the contracting States to study possible plans for internationalization of
air transport. In order that member countries might be Prepared in advance for an
expression of views on this subject, a letter was despatched by ICAO to contracting
States in July 1947 asking them to submit the results of their studies of possible plans
for the organization of international air transport under the following headings:

a. “a single organization to operate the world’s trunk routes”;
b. “organizations to operate trunk services within a given area by combining the
national interests concerned (for example, Europe)”; and

¢. “organizations for the international operation of services on individual routes
with the object of producing a single international instrument combining all or some
national organizations operating on particular routes (for example, Europe to South
America)”.

2 CONDIDEND EAL —
Page-5
Replies to the ICAO letter on “internationalization” were submitted by only eight
countries, four of which (Belgium, China, Nicaragua, and Switzerland) offered no
suggestions. Argentina indicated opposition and the Union of South Africa considered
that the world was not yet ready for concrete proposals on air transport international-
ization. Denmark and Sweden, although already involved with Norway in a consortium
for the operation of Scandinavian Airlines (SAS) declared that they had not yet gained
sufficient experience from which to draw conclusions. On the other hand, France and
the UK have made careful studies of the problem of internationalization and are ex-
pected to advance definite proposals at Geneva at least with regard to a European
pool of air transport companies.

3. ANALYSIS or PLANS FoR INTERNATIONALIZATION.

It appears that under the ICAO plan (a), a pool of aircraft would be made avail-
able to a single international Operating company established under ICAO and financed
by member countries.

Under plan (b) air lines operating over trunk routes within a given region would
be either (1) owned and operated by a single regional organization as in plan (a), or
(2) would be pooled under a single management but would retain their corporate
identity and operate their own equipment with their own personnel under control by
the governing body only as to routes, tates, frequencies and capacities.

Under plan (c), which is in effect an extension of plan (b, 1) or (b, 2),a regional
air transport pool or a single air line could combine with others in an international
organization for operations on trunk routes into other world areas.

Proponents of plans (a) and (b, 1) cite the following advantages:

standard policy;

uniform operating procedures;

unification of administrative functions;
simplification of repair and maintenance problems;
elimination of uneconomical routes.

Pp Rose!

On the other hand, proponents of plan (b, 2), while claiming the advantages of the
other plans for their own, point to plan (b, 2) as avoiding the obvious dangers inherent
in plans (a) and (b, 1) such as:

@. monopoly control, making for inefficiency through lack of competitive stimulus;

b. surrender of national control to an international body;

c. threat to national security if a breakdown occurs in the international harmony
necessary for international operations.

It is not likely that the proposal for international ownership and operation of
air services (plans a and b, 1) will gain general acceptance at this time. Detailed dis-
cussions will develop, however, on the formation of regional Pools of air services as out-
lined in plan (b, 2).

The anticipated discussion of plan (b, 2) will find active support from a number
of countries important in the air transport field, and will probably advance the forma-

3 SeONTIDENTIAL
Page-6
<ORFIDENTTAL—

tion of a Western European air transport organization. The nations cooperating in the
European Recovery Program will point to the logical application to civil aviation of
the principle of collaboration in Europe. The security of participating countries,
furthermore, would be safeguarded under this plan as the air lines would retain their
own operating organizations and a certain degree of autonomy. Thus, in event of a
dissolution of the pool, the participants would be capable of continuing essential air
transport services.

4. Errect or Foreign Arr TRANSPORT POoLs on THE US.

The US, with the greatest air traffic potential in the world within its borders,
and capable of financing its international air operations without recourse to multi-
lateral division of expenses, has no compelling incentive to participate in a single in-
ternational operating organization (plan a), nor would US air lines flying world trunk
routes have reason to join in regional air transport pools (plans b, 1; b, 2). Asa par-
ticipant in such international operating organizations, the US would be required to
accept curbs directly opposed to the principles of free and equal competition it has
advocated since the Chicago Convention of 1944. Asa non-participant, however, the
US would encounter growing competition resulting from the increased efficiency and
reduced operating costs effected by foreign air transport pools of air lines either govern-
ment-owned or heavily subsidized. This eventuality, though of serious concern to US air
carriers, would not necessarily preclude profitable operations unless an attempt were
made by such pools to reserve all air traffic over important segments of their routes to
their own air lines.

Although the Scandinavian countries, now operating international air carriers
under a combined management, have made no attempt to deny foreign air lines the
right to pick up traffic in one Scandinavian country for transport to another, a prece-
dent for discrimination by agreement already exists in the case of Portugal and Spain.
Traffic between these countries has been largely reserved to their own air carriers.
Furthermore, there is mutual recognition of the “special nature” of traffic between
Portugal and Brazil on the one hand and between Spain and the Spanish American
Republics on the other. Other nations whose air lines also fly between Iberia and
South America, have been forced to recognize the “special character” of traffic moving
over this route and are not permitted to compete for it.

Should this attempt toward restriction of outside interests spread to other world
trunk routes (a possibility, under plan c), US air lines would encounter a contracting
overseas market which might threaten the present US lead in world-wide commercial
aviation. Under these circumstances, the US might be faced with the alternative of (i)
consolidating US overseas air transport operations under a single management in an
effort to meet the competition of combined foreign interests, or (2) protecting US
air interests by the application of political pressure at the highest foreign governmental
levels. In the latter event, foreign countries, though able to demand or withhold con-
cessions to US air lines on relatively minor issues, would not be able to deny traffic
rights considered by the US to be essential to its national interest,

4 CQNFIDENTIAL
Page-7
CSrrmenrrar—

While it does not now appear likely that complete internationalization of air trans-
port will develop in the foreseeable future, US strategic interests might be adversely
affected if the trend is not carefully controlled. The formation of international operat-
ing organizations, for example, could threaten the method of direct negotiations by
which the US now obtains air agreements with other countries for rights at foreign
civil air bases.
Page-8
DISTRIBUTION

The President
Secretary of State
Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief
Secretary of Defense
Secretary of the Army
Secretary of the Navy
Secretary of the Air Force
Executive Secretary, National Security Council
Chairman, National Security Resources Board
Chief of Btaff, US Army
Chief of Naval Operations
Chief of Staff, US Air Force
Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, US Army
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations)
Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Research and Intelligence
Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army
Chief of Naval Intelligence
‘Director of Intelligence, US Air Force
Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group
Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission
Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission
Chief, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State
Page-9
U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
2532—S—1948