
Page-1

Page-2
ORE 11/2 ms sR
& April 1947 Copy Now

 

In Germany the conduct of the occupying Powers has been con-
ditioned not only by their common interest in preventing a recurrence
of the events. of 1919-1939, but also by their own pressing economic
needs, by ideological conflict, and by world-wide tension between the
East and West. Germany is the principal theatre of this contest:
there the stakes are highest, and there the antagonists are determined
to hold their ground at least, if they cannot win a satisfactory over-
all settlement. In these circumstances it ‘has so far proved impossible
to accomplish the econcmic and administrative unification of Germany
agreed upon at Potsdam.,In default of unification, the Soviet, Brit-
ish, and French authorities ‘have pursued, in.their respective Zones,
policies indicative of the divergent objectives of those Powers with
respect to Germany.

The ultimate, over-all objective of ‘the USSR is. the extension
of Soviet hegemony ovér the whole of Germany.** Great Britain's pur-
pose is to prevent such a development and to create instead a re-united
Germany moderately socialist in character, incapable of military aggres~
sion, but capable of. ‘upporting itself and of making its needed contri-
bution to the European economy. France, obsessed by fear.of German ag-
@vescion, would reduce Germany to political as well as military impo-
tence, but would preserve the German industrial potential, under strict
control, for the benefit of the Eurepean economy.

The divergent Positions of the three: Powers on specific issues
are as follows:

Frontierg. The USSR insists, that the Oder-Neisse frontier with
Poland be recognized as a fait. accompli. Britein would support a demand
for its eastward revision on economic grounds. France is not committed
to the Oder Neisse line, but has no objection te it in principle; on that
issue she would bargain for support of her own views regarding the Sear,
Rhineland, end Ruhr»

Thies report does Bot reflect Tevelopnente Qt the Council of Foreign
° ” yintstere,

The intelligence agencies of the War and Navy. Departments and of the
‘Army Air Forcea have concurred in thie report.
_ Comnents by ‘the Department of State: are contained ia Encleauré D

hereto.
: é Tha
” See Enclosure D for State Department comment. eon *e

nu
\e. Hine

   
      

..

“1s vament
Page-3
see cee

 

 

 

   

. Reparations from Current. Production. The USER has taken rep=
rations from the current production of ti et Zone and France has, vib
less frankly and extensively, engaged in similar exploitation of her Zone. =
Great Britain is opposed to the practice, as an indirect drain on the

& British economy.

, Production of War Materials. The USSR has continued the pro-
duction of war materials in her Zone, in apparent violation of the pro-
vielone of the Potsdam Agreement regarding demiliterization. Great
Britain and France condem the practice.

Economic Unification. Great Britain insists upon the economic
unification of Germany contemplated at Potsdam. The USSR and France have
preferred to act unilaterally in their respective Zones, but the USSR now
has reason to desire unification also in order to share in the Ruhr and .
Western Zone production. France insists upon the prior concession of ,
of the economic control of the Sear end international economic control
of the Ruhr.

Political Parties and Elections. Each of the three Powers
favors in its Zone the German political party moat suitable for the
eccomplishment of its own political purposes: thus the USSR supports
the Communists, Great Britain the Social Democrats, and France the
Christien parties, Thie support has been ruthless in the Soviet Zone,
while elections in the British Zone have been substantially free and
equitable.

Political Unification. The USSR seeks -a ‘highly centralized
national administration of a type susceptible to control by a pro-
Soviet group. Great Britain favors a federal union capable of provid-
Ang an effective central administration without destroying the local
eutonomy of the Laender. France desites the maximum obtainable degree
of decentralization, preferably a loose confederation of small states.

The USSR 16 now disposed to insist upon the early unification
of Germany. Great Britain also seeks unification; the issues between
them relate only to the terms on which it is to be accomplished. Since
a failure to reach agreement would entail the continued partition of
Germany for’ an indefinite period, with implications of irreconcilable
conflict, between the East and West, Great Britain, as would-be mediator
between’ the US and the USSR, will etrive to find a generally acceptable
compromise. Great Britain is wider no compuleion, however, to submit
to unacceptable Soviet terms. “Even in her. present economic difficulties,
she can accept partition, if need be, relying upon US support and the
unification of the Western Zones. -On the other hand, the USSR's need
for economic unification and her readiness to exploit political unifi-
eation are such that she might well accept. much textual compromise in
Page-4
‘poem Sate 6 IMS noRnNIM eit: parte

order to gain opportunities for further penetration, without foregoing
her ultimate objective. It 1s probable, therefore, that after exhaust-
ing debate a compromise consistent with the British proposals in all

easentials may be achieved.

. Further discussion of the situation in the throe Zones and
of the objectives and policies of the three Powers is conteined in
Enciosures A, B, and C.

oaeere?t
Page-5
Sin miter RRS TBR of ates meee

 

Ca EUS aa ee eee

* ENCLOSURE A
. THE SOVIET PROGRAM
SOVIET OBJECTIVES.

The minimum Soviet objective with respect to Germany is to
neutralize that country as a potentially hostile neighbor; the mxi-
mum is to extend effective Soviet political and economic control over
the whole country, reducing it to the status of a satellite. state.

In either case, an essential preliminary is the consolidation of So-
viet control in the Soviet Zone, free of quadripartite interference.
A subsequent step toward the maximum objective would be the estab-
lishment of that type of highly centralized "anti-fascist" national
administration by means of which indirect Soviet control could even-
tually be extended throughout the Western Zones.

Concurrently with these long-range political purposes, the
Soviet Union has sought to obtain in Germany immediate relief for the
pressing requirements of its own economy and support for its program
of industrial and scientific development.

. FRONTIERS.

Although the final delimitation of the western frontier of
Poland is expressly reserved until the future peace settlement, the
USSR demands that the Oder-Neisse line be recognized as a fait accompli.
This line, ostensibly drawn to compensate Poland for the cassion of ter-
ritory to the USSR, is also designed to render both Polend and Germany
subservient to the Soviet Union; Poland through fear of an eventual
German attempt to recover the lost provinces; Germany through the loss
of essential resources and a consequent dependence on the East for eco~
nomic support, and also through the hope of eventual Soviet support ‘for
frontier revision. The USSR is capable of imposing a revision at Po-
land's expense if ever it would serve to clinch Soviet domination of
Germany, but would never consent to a substantial revision which ap~
peared as a victory for the Western Powers.

 

The USSR will, moreover, oppose any radical revision of the
German frontier on the west comparable to that which she has effected
in the east. By defending the existing frontier she.can pose as the
champion of German interests, obscuring her role in the east and in~
creasing her influence in Germany. Moreover, she hopes eventually to
extend her domination to the western limite of Germany and is there-
fore opposed to their contraction, . :

REPARATIONS, _DEMILITARIZATION, AND CURRENT PRODUCTION.
nt ET

Reparations from the Soviet Zone. The Potsdam Agreement pro~
vided that Soviet reparations claims should be met by removal from the
Page-6
Soviet Zone of productive capacity in excess of that required to meet
approved German peacetime needs. Substantial progress has been made

in the removal of industrial facilities (an¢ of skilled industrial man-
power as well). The consequent interruption of produetion, however,
and the deterioration of facilities reserved for removal and in transit,
have caused the USSR to seek more immediate benefits from the current
production of plants retained in the Soviet Zone, despite objections to
the principle of taking reparations from current production.

The Sowjetische Industrie A.G. With @ view to both immediate

benefits and to the perpetuation of Soviet economic domination of east-
ern Germany, the USSR has obtained control of some 200 key industrial
establishments producing the greater portion of the current industrial
output in the Soviet Zone (for example, some 85 percent of current met-
e@llurgical production), largely on the basis of their liability to re-
moval as reparations. To control these industries the USSR has estab-
lished a gigentic trust, the Sowjetische Industrie A.G. ‘The USSR thus
seeks to evade the provisions of the Potsdam Agreement requiring thet
the proceeds of German exports be made available to pay for necessary
German imports and prohibiting German production of war material, on
the ground that the output of Soviet-owned plants in Germany is to be
considered as Soviet rather than German production and is therefore
exempt from the provisions of the Agreement.

. Nationalization. In ite Zone, the USSR has caused the import-
ant industries not included in the Sowjetische Industrie A.G. to be na~

tionalized, thus bringing them equally under Soviet erational control.

Demil:terization., A significant proportion of the Soviet
take from Germar. current production is in the form of war materials.
It is well established that war plants and research. facilities in the
Soviet Zone have been continued in operation,. producing such proehib-
ited items as guided missiles, jet~propelled aircraft, tenk treads and
armor plate, optical instruments, synthetic fuel, and synthetic rubber.

Industrial Production. In its desire to obtain immediate ben-
efits from German production, the USSR has pressed vigorously the indus-
trial rehabilitation in the Soviet Zone. The level of production is
still well below former standards, but, despite the disruption occa-
sioned by plant removals, significant progress has. been made. ‘The prompt
resumption of operations was initially encouraging to the German workers,
but since most production.is for Soviet use without credit toward im~

, ports, little improvement results inthe German economy. An acute short~
age of consumers’ goods exists in the Soviet Zone. Moreover, production
for Soviet use has begun to suffer for lack of coal and iron from the
Western Zones. It ie partiy on this account that the USSR now shows
readiness to consider a reintegration of the German economy.

Agricultural Production. If the Soviet Zone needs coal and
iron, the tern Zones, particularly the British, have long felt
Page-7
acutely the lack of food supplies normally received from eastern Ger-
many. A reintegration of the German economy, however, would not now
satisfy thie need. In addition to considerable Soviet consumption or
removal of agricultural produce, shortages of farm equipment, fertii~
izers, and livestock, and the disorgenization resulting from Soviet
division of large estates among the peasants for political effect,
have resulted in a decline in agricultural production. There is
hunger in the Soviet Zone itself; it can make no significant immediate
contribution toward feeding western Germany.

Reparations from the Western Zones. The Potsdam Agreement
provided that the USSR should aiso receive @ share of the industrial
plants removed from the Western Zones, partly in exchange for certain
Products of the Soviet Zone and partly on reparations account. Such
deliveries have virtually ceased because of the Soviet failure to de-
liver goods in exchange, the slowness of the British plant removal
program, and the refusal of the United States to make further deliv.
eries pending reintegration of the German economy. The Soviet clain
to reparations from the Western Zones remains to be reckoned with,
however. As indicated by developments in the Soviet Zone, this elaim
mey be exploited, at an opportune time, as @ means of acquiring owner=
Ship of industrial properties in western Germany,

DENAZIFICATION AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT.
Denazification. In the Soviet Zone the political criterion
has not been former Nazi Party activity or opposition thereto, but
present support of or opposition to the Soviet program. Former Nazis
who could prove themselves useful in the eccomplishment of Soviet po-
litical or economic purposes have been accepted without discrimination,
while irreconeilable opponents of the Soviet program, whatever their
political history, have been classified as "reactionaries", Obviously
the most expedient course for a compromised Nazi has been to become an
ardent supporter of the Soviet program. Recently, unverified reports
have indicated that the Soviet military authorities have been making a
belated effort to clean house before questions are raised at the Moscow
~akerence «

Zone Administration. The Soviet Zone is controlled by a
Soviet Military Administration which operates through a "Central Ad-
ministration” composed of Germans and similar in organization end
functions to the former national ministries. Thus, in its zonal con-
trol organization the USSR has forehandedly prepared a selected German
bureaucracy capable of manning at once any centralized German national
administration that may be established.

Political Parties in the Soviet Zone. As elsewhere, the USSR
sought to compensate for the numerical weakness of the Commmist Party
by the formation of & “Unity Front" under Communist leadership. The

«
Page-8
‘quested all political parties to join in drafting constitutions for

eee

 
 
 
    
   
  
   
 
  
   
  
    
   
   
   
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Communists, however, proved incapable of controlling the Social Demo~
cratic, Christian Democratic, and Liberal Democratic Parties through
thelr nominal particlpation in this Frent. The Soviets thereupon com-
pelled the Social Democratic Party to merge with the Communists, as
fellow Marxists, to form the Socialist Unity Party (SED). In the sub-
sequent local elections the Christian and Liberal Democrats were sub-
jected to every discrimination short of outright suppression, while the
SED was afforded every facility. Even so, the SED was able to win by
only slight pluralities. These, however, with continuing Soviet sup-
port, are sufficient to give it control of the machinery of local
German government in the Soviet Zone. .

The Berlin Election. An indication as to the actual popular

. strength of these parties in eastern Germany is to be found in the elec- .

tion results in Berlin. There, under the protection of the Western Pow-
ers, the Social Democrets maintained their independence end sharply de-
feated the SED, even within the Soviet Sector. The relative standing
of the four parties was, specifically:

Soviet

Sector Over-ail
Social Democrats 42.6% 47.9%
Christian Demecrats 18.3% 21.7%
SED . 29.5% 19.3%
Liberal Democrats 7.4% 9.2%

Any conjecture regarding the actual popularity of these parties in the
Soviet Zone mst take into account the fact that in rural areas the
strength of the Social Democrats would normally be lees than in Berlin,
and that of the Christian Democrats greater. It is evident, however,
that in a free election the SED, reduced to ite Communist element,
would be overwhelmed.

The FDGB. The Soviet Union is well aware of the value of
trade union control as a political weapon supplementary to party ac-
tion las, for example, in the relationship between the Communist Party
and the General Confederation of Labor (CGT) in France). For that rea-
sen the USER has promoted the formation of a "Free German Trade Union
League" (FDGB) actually controlled by members of the SED. An immediate
return on this investment is ‘that the FOGB’s extensive influence in
‘he Berlin civil service limits the adverse effect of the Social Demo-
cratic victory in the Berlin election. Ultimately the FDGB may prove

 

_& better means than the for penetration of the Western Zones.

Constitution Drafting. ‘The Soviet authorities have now re-

 
   
 

each Land in the Soviet Zone, but it ie evident that the Commmist
leadership of the SED will have the determining voice in this process.
Page-9
Meanwhile the SED has published a proposed "national! constitution,
which, despite lip service to democratic principles, would secve to
permit a well-entrenched minority to obstruct the administration of
the country through the machinery of a highly centralized national
administration." The SED calls for a national referendum to deter-
mine the political structure of the future German state, and proposes
that the central administration be Bet up by the representatives of
national parties and unions rather than of the Laender. It is evi-
dent why the SED (and the USSR) should be oppos.d to national action
ona Laender basis, and how, on the basis proposed, the could ex-
Pect to control both the referendum and the actual establishment of
central administrative agencies designed to facilitate its accession
to end perpetuation in power and to extend throughout Germany its con-
trol over local as well as national affairs.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND PROSPECTS.

The USSR is now well-entrenched in the Soviet Zone. In the
Sowjetische Industrie A.G., the FDGB, and the SED it has instruments
designed to perpetuate its dominant influence. Although the SED mani-
festly does not represent the majority popular will, it is presumably
able to maintain its position with Soviet support.

a The USSR now is ready and has need to extend its program from
& Zonal to a national basis. In the bureaucracy of the Central Admin-
istration, the SED-Commnist national committee recently formed in Ber-
lin, and the FDGB it hes at hand the means of extending its influence
westward. It even has a draft national constitution of ostensibly Ger-
man origin ready for use as the basis of discussion. :

The highly centralized administration envisaged in the draft
constitution represents an optimum condition for Soviet purposes, but
not an essential immediate requirement. Soviet preparedness in terms
of personne), organi=ution, and planning is such that the USSR could
accept much textual compromise without loss of real advantages ensuing
from unification. Before compromising, however, the USSR would make a
vigorous demonstration of its advocacy of centralization, for the rec-
ord, realizing that unification has a strong appeal to German nation-
alism and that decentralization can be identified historically with
foreign interference and national dismemberment. As secn as a tompro~
mise had been reached, on whatever terms, the USSR would press vigor~

ously its penetration of the Western Zones, working toward eventual
centralization under a Soviet-dominated regime in Berlin.

—o_SS CS
" See Enclosure D for State Department comment,
Page-10
5 a ’
enc anina niacin tei itm pian ari eet SEE MA in sta senor Marin ttt

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ape

ENCLOSURE B
SHE BRITISH PROGRAM

BRITISH OBJECTIVES.

The basic British objective is a defensive one, to avert the
danger to the United Kingdom inherent in the control of Germany by 2
strong and aggressive military power, whether through a resurgence of
German nationalism or through an extension of the hegemony of the So-

viet Union.

A positive aspect of this policy is a desire for the rehabil-
itation of Germany as a respectable member of the European community,
abie to support itself and to make its needed contribution to the Euro-
pean economy, prosperous enough to obviate dangerous discontent, but
not strong enough to act aggressively (or even to compete seriously
with Great Britain in international trade). The British Labor Govern-
ment not unnaturally regards a socialistic program as most favorable
for the economic and social rehabilitation of Germany, and the Social
Democratic Party as the most suitable instrument for its accomplishment.
It regards a federal political structure as most suitable to provide
the necessary safeguards against the concentration of political power

in hostile hands.

“In view of Great Britain's own straitened financial position,
an immediate and urgent British objective is to reduce so far as prac-
ticable the burden of her occupational commitments in Germany.

FRONTIERS.

Great Britain desires no particular readjustment of the German
frontiers except possibly the recovery for Germany of some territory now
ceeupled by Polend east of the Oder-Neisse line. ‘There the primary con-
sideration is that the recovery of agricultural areas in the east might
contribute toward alleviation of the critical food supply situation in
the British Zone. The British have indicated that they would support &
proposal for eastward adjustment of the line in eo far as it could be
justified on economic grounds. By implication, they would not take the
inithative in any political argument for adjustment.

REPARATIONS, DEMILTTARIZATION ,_AND ECONOMIC REHABILITATION.

Re tions. In contrast with the Soviets, the British derive
no immediate economic benefit from the occupation of their Zone. On the
contrary, they are compelled to provide occupation costs amounting to
$340,000,000 @ year from their strained resources, largely from their
dwindling and vital supply of US dollars. Consequently their concern
4s to reduce occupation costs by making their Zone self-supporting

~

hee saa Sy Rite ES he mn

Ae AE AON A Nee neT i tN

 

8 RN DU aA BL PRE SCTE :
POPS MOAR REET EM CER SRL A" HY ROR
man so STERNER ET
Page-11
rather than to obtain reparations deliveries at the possible cost of
preventing or retarding German economic recovery. For the same reason
they are opposed to the practice of others in taking reparations from
current production. They have net refused to other clalmants the de~
livery of industrial plants removable as reparations, as has the United
States for the time being, but they have been slow in meeting such ceom~
mitments.

Demilitarization. Although the British have been dismantling
war plants for reparations deliveries, many remain intact. These are,
however, idle. Criticism of the British demiliterization program re-
fers, not to any continuation of the production of war materials, as in
the Soviet Zone, but to slowness in the elimination of war industrial
potential and in the demobilization of German military forces.

Nationalization. Eventual nationalization of heavy industry
in the British Zone is planned. For the time being, however, the Brit-
ish, in their desire to bring about. the resumption of production with
the least disruption and delay, have altered little the existing organ-
ization of industry. The great German cartels have not been effectively
broken up, presumably because their continued operation would facilitate
both an early resumption of production and eventual nationalization.
Because of the US/UK Zonal merger and inereased British economic de-
pendence upon the US, plans for nationalization have had to be indefi-
nitely postponed.

Industrial Production, Industriel recovery in the British
Zone has been slow, partly on account of the particularly heavy war
damage theze, partly on account of the difficuities inherent in oper-
ating, on a zonal basis, an industrial establishment which constituted
the heart of the over-all German (indeed Eyropean) economy, and partly
on account of the stringent shortage of food supplies to sustain the
industrial population. Considerable progress, however, has been made.
The industriel preduction of the Ruhr has reached 40 percent of its
prewar Level.

Food Supply. Agricultural production in the British:Zone is
normally inadequate to meet its requirements. Great Britain has had to
provide foodstuffs by purchase in & strained world market, at great ex-
pense in US dollars. Higher’rations are prerequisite to the increased
industrial production required to provide the exports necessary to pay
for essential imports of foodstuffs and raw materials. Until this cycle
has been completed, Great Britain must continue to subsidize heavily the
economy of the British Zone. :

Economia Unification. The British look to that economic uni-
fication of Germany contemplated at Potsdam, but as yet unrealized, for
relief from their present predicament. Beonemie union with the US Zone
Page-12
may alleviate in some degree adverse conditions in the British Zone,
but it cannot provide an ultimate solution of the problem. To the
extent that the British hope, through general unification, to obtain
necessary food supplies from eastern Germany, they are liable to dis-
appointment isee Enclosure A). Nevertheless, one of the bases of
British policy with respect to Germany is the conviction that eco-
nomic unification is indispensable.

DENAZIFICATION AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT.

Denazification. In their desire to avoid Gisrupting the Ger~
man economic organization and civil service in their Zone, the British
have been disinclined to proceed against all persons associated with
the Nazi Party. Instead they have relied upon good intelligence to de-
tect those actually dangerous to the conduct of the occupation and upon
timely action to deal with individuals thus identified.

Zone Administration. Control in the British Zone is exercised
by a Civil Administrator acting through an extensive British civil ser-
vice superimpogzed on a German bureaucracy. This arrangement has proved
80 cumbersome and inefficient that the Control Office has been subjected
to a Parliamentary investigation of charges of waste and ineptitude.
Since few German officiels can act without close British supervision
and prior approval, the system prevents the development of German re-
sponsibility and initiative. It tends, however, to relieve German po-
litical leaders of future responsibility for present adverse conditions
in the British Zone.

Political Parties and Elections. The Social Democrats and
Christian Democrats are the principal parties in the British Zone. The
Communists represent no more than 8 percent of the electorate; the var-
ious right-of-center elements are divided and uncoordinated. The Social
and Christian Democratic Parties are about everily matched in popular sup-
port, but the complex electoral procedures established. by the British
have operated to the advantage of the stronger party in any given lo-
cality. The Social Democratic Party has enjoyed certain favor in con-
Sequence of its political affinity with the Labor Party in Great Britain,
signalized by the visit to London of ite leader, Kurt Schumacher.

Elections have been held at the Kreis (county) and municipal
level and German local governments have been installed on the basis of
the returns, tut under striet British supervision. At the next level
three Leender (Nordrhein-Westfalen, Niedersachsen, and Schleswig-
Holstein} and a city-state (Hamburg) have been established, but consti-
tutions heve not yet been devised for them, nor have elections been held.

nn Federal Union. The Britieh favor a national constitution for
Germany similar, in its federal features, to that of the United States,
,with the Laender to be equally represented in one house of a- bicameral

“
Page-13
legislature and with all powers not expressly delegated to the central
government reserved to the Laender, Therein they occupy a middle ground
between the extreme centralization desired by the Soviete and the ex-
treme decentralization desired by the French, The British program of
economic unification and nationalization of industry requires an effect-
ive central administration, They hope, through a federal political sys-
tem, to avert the concomitant dangers of an extension of Soviet domina~
tion or a resurgence of aggressive German nationalism.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND PROSPECTS.

The economie rehabilitation of the British Zone has been re-
tarded by peculiarly adverse conditions; its political development has
been slow, but favorable toward a Western orientation. In present cir~
cumstances the costs of cccupation are a grievous burden upon the
strained resources of the United Kingdom, one which the British are
eager to reduce. Their hope for. such reduction lies in the early
restoration of production for export and in the economic unification
of Germany, for which they will press insistently, as well as in
greater US contributions to the bi-zonal merger. Recognizing that
economic unification requires an effective central administration,
but fearing the consequences of a ‘high degree of political central-
ization, they will also urge the adoption of a federal political
structure for Germany.
Page-14
ENCLOSURE C -
HE FRENCH PROGRAM
FRENCH OBJECTIVES.

The basis ef French policy with respect to Germany is an his-
torical dread of German aggression, an obsession which blinds France to
other contemporary considerations. Her sense of present weakness accen-
tuates this fear and also produces a compensatory desire to assert her
nominal status as a Great Power. :

The specific objectives of French policy, in response to these
influences, are: :

To strengthen France and weaken Germany by gaining exclu-
sive economic control of the Sear and by obtaining interna~
tional economic control of the Ruhr.

To render the French frontier more secure by obtaining
some form of international contro] over the Rhineland.

To obtain the maximum possible degree of political decen-
tralization, as a safeguard against the revival of a strong
and aggressive German state.

To guarantee French receipt of German coal and to insure
that only strictly limited amounts of steel will be available
to German production.

FRONTIERS.

France, as in 1919-1924, would prefer that the Sear, the Rhine-
land, and the Ruhr be separated from Germany. She demands the political
separation of the Saar, its economic union with France, and the establish-
ment of effective international economic control over the Ruhr.

France jas no objection in principle to the establishment of
the Polish-German frontier at the Oder-Neisse line, but has reserved her
concurrence ag a bargaining point in relation to the issue of Germany's
western frontier. .

REPARATIONS AND CURRENT PRODUCTION.

Reparations. Although France has not endorsed the Soviet po-
sition on reparations from current production, she has, like the USSR,
exploited her exclusive control of her Zone to obtain immediate economic
benefits without much regard for reparations and level of industry agree-
ments. This exploitation has taken the form of both unilateral removals

~
Page-15
and French penetration of the Zone's economy through the acquisition of
German cartel holdings and by other means. A form of reparations from
surrent production is obtained from the Zone's excess of exports over
imports. ‘ :

Industria] Production. Industrial rehabilitation elsewhere
in the Zone has been subordinated to the rehabilitation of the Saar.
By arbitrary transfers of manpower to that area and other preferential
measures, including special rations, the french have raised the level
of Saar production to 50 percent of prewar capacity. This effort, to-
gether with the low level of imports permitted, has resulted in a "fae
Vorable" trade balance for the Zone (to the advantage of the French
economy rather than that of the Zone).

Food Supply. Agricultural production in the Zone is normally
inadequate to meet food requirements. The French customarily maintain
rations at a dangerously low levei, and there have been frequent food
crises. ,

RENAZIRICATION AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT.

Denazification. The French, regarding all Germans as guilty,
whether or not they were: Nazis, have been-disposed to proceed against
only those who were conspicuous leaders and those individually identi-
fied as war criminals. More recently, like the USSR, France has uNder- -
taken to broaden her denazification progran.

. Zone Administration. The French administrative officials en-
force strict regulations through a closely supervised German bureaucracy.
Among the French some differences have been observed between civil ser-
vants whe wish to develop a liberal Germany friendly toward France and
Army officers who enjoy the role of conquerors, ™ .

Political Parties, The French, as.a consequence of their op-
position to any reunification of Germany, have consistently hindered the
development of nation-wide political parties, Although elements corre-
sponding to the four basic German political 8roups (Communist, Soeial-
ist, Christian, and Liberal) exist in the French Zone, they have not
been allowed to coalesce with corresponding parties in other areas. .
The Fren¢h have favored the Christian parties, which have some corres-
pondence to the MRP in France and are, among German political groups,
most, likely to support French policy. They have, in addition, given”
more or less covert encouragement to separatist elements. The strength
of the Communist Party in France has been without apparent influence in
the Zone, where, except for the individual aets of a few French officials,
the Communists have received no favors,

-l14- we
Page-16
In the Zone, exclusive of the Baar, the Christian parties

. Won over 65 percent of the vote in the Kreia (county) electiuns, the
only. ones held so far. Although this figure may be discounted some~-
what, in view of hindrances imposed on other parties, it reveals that

. the Christian parties are predominant in the Zone.

: In the Saar the Communists are the only open opponents of
the French plan for separation from Germany and economic union with
France.

Decentralization. For two and a half centuries (1630-1870)
the cardinal. principle of French policy was to prevent the unification
ef Germany. Such is their fear of German aggression, after the events
of 1870, 1914, and 1940, that, however weak Germany may be. and whatever
other guarantees are given, the French retein, as an obsession, a de-
sire to reduce that country to the status of & loose confederation of
small states.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND PROSPECTS.

’ France has, by unilateral action, virtually accomplished the
separation of the Saar from Germany and its integration into the French
economy. She has not been able to obtain acceptance of her views on
the Ruhr and Rhineland or on extreme decentralization. She is presum-
ably willing to accept any compromise which assures her of direct con-
trol of the Saar, effective international control of the Ruhr, a satis-
factory supply of German coal, a reasonable degree of political decen-
“tralization, and convincing guarantees against future German aggression.

-18-
Page-17
ENCLOSURE_D

COMMENTS BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Reference: Sunmary: Page 1, end of first sentence in second paragraph:

"This definition is so general it cannot be used as a standard
for estimating and evaluating Soviet policy toward Germany. It
minimizes or neglects the alternative policies which the USSR
may pureve in Germany. For example: :

"The USSR may prefer a division end a corresponding perma~
nent weakening of Germany rather than "highly centralized na-
tional administration,’ which might work in favor of anti-
Soviet groups (especially the Social Democratic Party)?

"The USSR may sacrifice political advantages in Germany
to tangible economic benefits.

"In both cases, the objective of established Soviet hegem-
ony over the whole of Germany would be superseded or replaced .
by the objective of promoting the vital national interests of
the USSR."

Reference: Enclosure A: Page 8, end of second sentence on Constitution
Drafting: .

"Whatever the intention of the constitutional draft may have
been, its text does not bear out this interpretation, The
SED constitution would grant almost unlimited power to the
parliamentary majority -- however it may be composed. Under
present conditions and for the foreseeable future, this ma~
dority would be anti-Soviet.t