
Page-13
NIE 11~13/1-55
6 December 1955

cert

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 11-13/1-55
(Supplements NIE 11-13-55)

REVIEW OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY IN
THE LIGHT OF THE GENEVA
FOREIGN MINISTERS CONFERENCE

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

Submitted by the

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.

Concurred in by the

INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
on 6 December 1955. Concurring were the Special Assistant,
Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of
Staff, G-2, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval
Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and the
Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic
Energy Commission Representative to the IAC and the Assist-
ant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the

subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

 

REVIEWER:
cary re 378
7
Page-14
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient indicated on the front cover and of per-
sons under his jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination
may be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary for Intelligence, for the Department of
State

b. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, for the Department of the Army
c, Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
€. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
£. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
h. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency
2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-

* cable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
ment with the Office of Central Reference, CIA,

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2, 22
June 1953.

 

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense
Operations Coordinating Board
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-15
REVIEW OF SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY IN THE LIGHT OF THE
GENEVA FOREIGN MINISTERS’ CONFERENCE

THE PROBLEM

To assess current Soviet foreign policy in the light of the Geneva Foreign Minis-
ters’ Conference and recent Soviet moves in other areas, particularly in the Middle

East.

THE ESTIMATE

1. The stalemate at the Geneva Foreign Min-
isters’ Conference, taken together with recent
Soviet moves in the Middle East and South
Asia, has been widely interpreted in the Free
World as evidence of a renewed hardening of
Soviet policy. Soviet policy has been seen as
turning its back upon the prospects of peace-
ful settlements opened by the Summit meet-
ing and launching itself again upon the path
of intensive cold war. We shall examine in
this paper whether such a shift in Soviet poli-
cy has in fact taken place, and the motiva-
tions for recent Soviet behavior.

|. THE USSR’S DEFINITION OF THE “SPIRIT OF
GENEVA”

2. In inquiring whether Soviet policy shifted
between the first and second Geneva meetings,
it is important to be clear on what significance
the Soviet leaders did and did not attach to
the Summit meeting and the series of “con-
ciliatory” maneuvers which preceded it. We
have previously estimated, and still believe,
that the Soviet leadership actually desires the
“reduction in international tensions” which it
has proclaimed as the object of its policy
By a “reduction in international tensions” the
Soviet leaders meant the establishment of a
tacit understanding that issues in dispute be-
tween the Bloc and the West would not be

allowed to lead to a general East-West crisis
involving serious danger of general war.'

3. The Soviet leaders almost certainly did not
expect that a reduction in tensions and the
“spirit of Geneva” which was its manifesta-
tion would bring about an early settlement of
major issues between the Bloc and the West.
Our previous estimate made it clear that no
concessions by the USSR on such vital issues
as Germany and disarmament would be forth-
coming, and stressed that the main aim of
Soviet policy in the negotiations would be to
insure continuing acquiescence in the terri-
torial status quo in Eastern Europe. At the
same time, the Soviet leaders gave no assur-
ances at the Summit meeting that they would
abandon the pursuit of their own objectives,
whether in Europe or elsewhere. On the con-
trary, they made it entirely clear that they
would permit no discussion of International
Communism or of the status of the Satellites,
and that the USSR would persist in its effort
to obtain withdrawals of American power and
influence.

‘We believe that the motives for this attitude dis-

cussed in NIE 11-13-55 were correct and that they
are still operative. See especially paragraphs
11-17 of NIE 11-13-55, “Soviet Foreign Policy in
the Light of the Summit Conference,” dated 4
October 1955.

Sheree 1
Page-16
SECRET

4, The intransigent stand which Molotov took
at the Foreign Ministers’ meeting did not
represent any departure in substance from
positions which were implicit at the Summit
meeting. The Heads of Government did not
explore these positions to the point where they
were fully exposed; when this was done at the
second Geneva meeting the USSR’s basic posi-
tions were revealed to be unchanged from
what they have been for some years past.
The fact that. the stubborn personality of
Molotov was associated with the presentation
of the Soviet stand perhaps heightened the
impression of intransigence. In fact, how-
ever, the essentials of Soviet policy were iden-
tical on the two occasions, and the widespread
impression that Soviet policy had hardened
was due in the main to unwarranted popular
expectations of a softening trend which did
not develop.

5. The more active Soviet policy which was
developed in the Near and Middle East and
South Asia in recent months, in particular
in connection with the sale of arms to Arab
states and the attitude and statements of
the Soviet leaders during their current trip
in South Asia, has also been seen as a retreat
from the “promise” of the Summit meeting.
However, nothing that was said by the USSR
at the Summit meeting gave any promise that
the Soviet leaders would abandon their effort
to combat Western influence in areas touching
Soviet interests, and in fact there is hard evi-
dence that deals such as the Egyptian arms
deal were planned prior to the Summit meet-
ing. Previous estimates have stated that the
USSR would step up its activity in the Middle
East in response to Western moves to organize
defense in that area. From the Soviet paint
of view, the progress made by the Northern
Tier concept since the spring of 1955 has been
a stimulus to Soviet intervention. The par-
ticular form this intervention has taken was
not foreseen in previous estimates. We still
believe that the USSR does not intend to push
that intervention to the point of provoking
@ major crisis with the Western Powers, but
its actions have already gone far toward pro-
voking a major crisis within the area, and

have strained relations between the major :
Western Powers and certain Middle Eastern
states.

I. SOVIET TACTICS AT GENEVA

6. Our previous estimate anticipated more
flexibility in Soviet negotiating tactics at the
Foreign Ministers’ meeting than was actually
shown. The effect of such flexibility would
have been to avoid quite so heavy a setback
to the “spirit of Geneva” and to have blurred
the impression of intransigence which the So-
viet negotiators did in fact give. Except for
some effort by Molotov to avoid the more bitter
recriminations which marked previous Big
Four meetings and some attempt at the end
to save the conference from the appearance
of complete breakdown, the Soviets did little
to foster a Western belief in the USSR’s desire
to end the cold war.

7. We believe that the Soviet leaders had some
positive reasons for wishing to make a demon-
stration of firmness at the recent negotiations.
They apparently feel that, although they do
have some internal problems, these are man-
ageable and present no compulsion for com-
promising their stand on issues in dispute
with the West. On the whole, the Soviet
leaders probably regard the future course of
the world struggle with confidence. They
came away from the Summit meeting re-
assured that the West does not intend to em-
ploy its power to force Soviet concessions, and
they believe that in the absence of a military
showdown the general development of the
world situation will be favorable to them.
Given this confident state of mind, they ap-
parently wished to make it entirely clear,
especially in view of the wide speculation in
the West about their internal weakness, that
there can be no progress toward settlement of
outstanding issues if it requires them to make
any significant concessions. They probably
also felt under some necessity to make clear
to the Satellite regimes, especially to East
Germany, that the existence of these regimes
would not be endangered for the sake of an
agreement with the West.

SHORES
Page-17
SHORES 3

8. With respect to the first item on the For-
eign Ministers’ agenda, the question of Euro-
pean security and Germany, a stalemate at
this conference probably was seen by the So-
viet leaders as advantageous. One of their
principal current objectives is to demonstrate
to the West Germans that there can be no
hope for fulfillment of aspirations for reunifi-
cation by way of Four Power negotiations.
The Soviet leaders probably calculated that
failure of this conference would be a long step
toward convincing the West Germans, and the
East Germans as well, that the Western “posi-
tion of strength” will not be effective in ob-
taining Soviet agreement to reunification.
This they probably hope will have the effect
of impeding West German rearmament, and
of persuading the West Germans to enter into
separate negotiations with East Germany and
the USSR which might lead to abandonment
of their ties with NATO. Ultimately, the
USSR hopes for reunification on terms which
would be favorable to a Communist takeover.

9. On the disarmament issue, it was made
even clearer that the USSR is unwilling to
accept any comprehensive inspection system
vsatisfactory to the West, and is particularly
opposed to the President's proposal for aerial
inspection. The Soviet counter arguments
continue to rest on demands for a ban on nu-
clear weapons and for reduction to agreed
force levels. However, the Soviet position on
disarmament may not have been fully revealed
at Geneva. For example, the possibility of
disarmament and inspection on a restricted
area basis, as contained in the Eden plan, was
not fully explored at the conference. It is
still possible that the USSR would find such
a scheme acceptable, especially as it would,
if applied in Germany, win a tacit Western
acceptance for continuing the division of the
country. Aside from this, however, Geneva
showed that the Soviet position had to remain
fixed because the Soviet leaders are unwilling
to contemplate the kind of comprehensive in-
Spection upon which the West has insisted.

10. On freedom of contacts, the USSR was pri-
marily interested in breaking down Western
Strategic trade controls, while the West pre-
sented a comprehensive program for greater

freedom of information. Some Western pro-
posals the USSR was certain to refuse, and did
so, since acceptance would have involved steps
toward ending the isolation of the Soviet and
Satellite peoples which the regime clearly re-
gards as essential. On other proposals, the
USSR indicated agreement in principle or sug-
gested bilateral negotiations, but no agree-
ments were actually concluded. Neverthe-
less, the USSR showed itself prepared to con-
tinue and even expand the kind of controlled
Program of contacts by delegations which
serve a propaganda purpose and acquire use-
ful information. In short, while Soviet policy
cannot accept Western principles of freedom
in contacts between nations, it probably does
not intend to return to the extremes of post-
World War II isolationism.

tll, IMPLICATIONS.OF GENEVA FOR FUTURE
SOVIET POLICY

11. It is evident that the Soviet leaders have
no intention in the foreseeable future of mov-
ing toward a settlement of the major issues
between them and the West. They recognize
that they could do so only by making impor-
tant concessions.. This they not only feel
under no compulsion to do, but in the case of
Germany almost certainly believe that to
make concessions would be dangerous to their
Satellite empire. The confidence which the ‘
Soviet leaders show in taking this position
may be based in part on the impression of
Western intentions they received at the
Summit meeting. Their confidence must
have been reinforced by their recent progress
in the development of large-yield nuclear
weapons.

12. Unless there should be a major deteriora-
tion of the international atmosphere, the
USSR is unlikely for some time to press seri-
ously toward resumption of Four Power nego-
tiations. There have been many signs, how-
ever, that it intends to direct intensified ef-
forts toward bilateral negotiations with US
allies and uncommitted states in the Middle
East and Asia. The object of such efforts
would be to work toward the sapping of Free
World alliances and the isolation of the US

SreREE
Page-18
SECREE 4

The Soviet leaders may even believe that
eventually the US itself will be willing to
negotiate bilaterally.

13. The Soviet leaders probably recognize that
to pursue such efforts successfully it will be
necessary for the Bloc to refrain from major
military aggression. Overtly, they will prob-
ably continue their efforts to demonstrate
that the USSR’s intentions are peaceful while
at the same time stressing that it is the West-
ern Powers which are backsliding from the
“spirit of Geneva.” While there will remain
various points of critical friction in Berlin,
the Taiwan Strait, and Indochina, and per-
haps elsewhere, we believe on balance that
the USSR does not intend to allow a general
East-West crisis of major proportions to grow
out of these situations.

14. It is apparently the Soviet intention to
give heavy attention to the Middle East and
South Asia. The sale of arms and the ex-
tensive offers of technical and economic aid
which have been made there are new depar-
tures for Soviet policy, and demonstrate the
flexibility of its current leadership. The Bloc
has certain advantages in competing with the
West for influence in these areas. It can play
upon the endemic suspicion of the former
colonial powers and the widespread admira-
tion for the rapid pace of Soviet economic
development. It is in a better position than
the West to absorb certain important raw
materials exports of some of these countries,
and presumably has ample stocks of obso-
lescent arms to provide one means of pay-
ment. It is now offering credit on easier
terms than the West finds feasible.

15. Whether or not the Bloc can develop such
a program on a Significant scale will depend
upon the availability of resources within the
Bloc, for which the economic development of
the Bloc, especially of Communist China, and
the Bloc’s military programs will be competi-
tors. The competitive challenge offered by
the West will also be a factor. It is too early
to judge how far such a program may be
developed or even if the present offers will
be fulfilled. We think it unlikely, however,
that the USSR is engaged merely in a cam-
paign of propaganda promises, and more prob-
able that the Soviet leaders are determinedly
entering upon a campaign of “competitive
coexistence.”

IV. CONCLUSION

16. Previous estimates have stated, and recent
developments including the Foreign Ministers’
Conference confirm, that the objectives of the
post-Stalin regime remain the same as those
of its predecessor — to increase the power and
improve the security of the Communist Bloc,
to prevent the marshaling of the Free World’s
power against the Bloc, and to expand the
Communist sphere. The present regime has
developed policies designed to achieve these
objectives by means which are less obviously
aggressive than before. It hopes thereby to
improve its reputation for peaceful intentions.
Meanwhile, the Soviet leaders believe that by
persistent and vigorous diplomacy, propa-
ganda, economic penetration, and subversion,
especially in areas where the Free World is
vulnerable, they can gradually alter the bal-
ance of power and influence in their favor.
Page-19
