
Page-1
“Director of
4% Central
Intelligence

 
 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: MAY 2001
Page-2
Warning Notice Intelligence Sources

 

 

 

 

 

 

or Methods Involved
(WNINTEL)
National Security Unauthorized Disclosure
Information Subject to Criminal Sanctions
Dissemination Control NOFORN (NF) Not releasable to foreign nationals ‘
Abbreviations NOCONTRACT (NC) Not releasable to contractors or contractor/consultants
PROPIN (PR) Caution—proprietary information involved
ORCON (OC) Dissemination and extraction of information
controlled by originator
REL... This information has been authorized for release to...
WN WNINTEL —Intelligence sources or methods involved

  

£0 12958 6.1(c}<10Vrs
w

 

All material on this page
is Unclassified.
Page-3
Director of
Central
Intelligence

 

Twat pases Blark)

 

NIE 11/1-92

Russia Over the Next
Four Years: The Prospects
for Democratization

and Marketization TONE)

Information available as of 28 May 1992 was used
in the preparation of this National Intelligence Estimate.

The following intelligence organizations participated
in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense Intelligence Agency

The National Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

The Office of Intelligence Support,

Department of Energy

also participating:

The Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Intelligence,
Department of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence,
Headquarters, Marine Corps

This Estimate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board.

Cops
iy 1992
Page-4
Key Judgments

Russia Over the Next
Four Years: The Prospects
for Democratization

and Marketization 1CNFr

 

E0 12958 6.1{c}<10Vrs

Ww) Long-range estimative judgments about an epochal revolution in progress
must be seen as an effort to discern what can be said with confidence; what
alternative courses events may take and the implications of each; what
signs to look for as to general directions; and, finally, what the best

estimate is. i

First, the certainties. Over the next four years, Russia will remain very

£0 12958 6.1fc}<10Yrs unstable. Under the best conditions, there will be serious crises and

w turmoil. In the next year or so, tensions are bound to increase significantly
as unemployment grows and privatization evokes bitter quarrels over social
justice. Powerful pressures will be brought to bear on any Russian
government to adopt inflationary policies and slow the process of economic
restructuring. Nationalism of various stripes will gain momentum. The
factors of chance, the sequencing of events, and personality will impact
disproportionately upon Russia’s evolution. ay

£0 12958 6.1c)<10Vrs Yel’tsin will be hard put to maintain power and authority in the face of the

w population’s exhausting struggle for a normal existence. Russia will not be
spared the psychological “‘post-totalitarian depression” still widely noted in
Eastern Europe. The rule of law will come slowly. Institutionalization of
progressive change—not only codification, but routine acceptance by the

population—will require time. iz

Shortages of food, fuel and other consumer necessities, rising unemploy-

£0 12958 6.11c)<10Vrs ment, declining real income, and anger over corruption and increasing

w) economic disparities are the main factors that will undermine public
support for steps needed to marketize the economy. While some of these
conditions may stabilize or improve in the next year or so, some will get
worse. Major strikes and public unrest are highly likely. Over the next
year, unemployment will rise sharply, and in some regions it will reach
dangerously high levels. In the best possible case, there are bound to be
enormous inertia and resistance in each area of structural reform.

£0 12958 6.1[c]<10Vrs Yet, reversion to the previous order is not possible. The Communist

tw) alternative is discredited. A full-blown command economy cannot be
restored. The need to move toward some kind of market economy is
broadly accepted in principle. Restoration of a Moscow-dominated empire
of former Soviet Republics is beyond Russia’s military or political capabili-

a

iii —GConfidential_
NE 11[1-92
May 1992
Page-5
Cont ial

 

’RN-NOCONTRACT

£0 12958 6.1[c)<10¥rs The completion of Russia’s economic restructuring will take many years.

w)

£0 12958 6.11c)<10Yrs
w

EO 12958 6.1(c}<10Yrs
w)

 

By 1996, it is almost certain that a large monopoly-ridden state industrial
sector and major remnants of the collective farming structure will still
exist. The question is, what will be the trend of restructuring? ||

Russia has made an important start toward democracy and a market
economy. It has conducted two elections by secret ballot, voted in a
president, gained experience in pluralistic politics, and avoided violence.
These are not transient bits of good news but developments rooted in
genuine strivings of new elites and the general population. But this is only a

a

Further progress along the road to a relatively stable pluralistic society will

be determined by several key variables:

« The general sense of Russian nationhood that fills the national identity
void: statist and imperialist, or liberal democratic.

« Emergence of an economic order that begins to fulfill popular
expectations.

« Acceptance by the military and security services of much diminished
roles without rebellion. .

Preservation of Russian territorial integrity and resolution of conflict
with other former Soviet republics—especially Ukraine—without major
violence.

¢ A Western approach that provides support to reform and also to Russia’s
battered psyche, without inflating expectations.

Consolidating a free political and economic order in Russia will take
decades. Looking forward over the next four years, we see three possible
paths of development:

* Democratization and marketization: a successful continuation of present
positive trends. We assign a slightly-better-than-even chance to this
scenario, mainly because we judge generally positive outcomes to the
variables just noted above to be more likely than not. We note, however,
that even this promising path will be marked by recurring crises.

© Stagnation and possible fragmentation: failure of efforts to resolve key
constitutional and center-periphery issues, stabilize finances, or make
progress on economic structural reform, eventually threatening fragmen-
tation of the country. We think the chances of this path are about 1 in
3—given the consequences, a worrisome possibility.
Page-6
EO 12958 6.1(c})<10Yrs
w)

£0 12958 6.1{c)<10Vrs
w)

EO 12958 6.11c)<10Yrs
w)

£0 12958 6.1{c)<10Yrs
Ww)

 

   
 

NOFOSENOCONTRACT

¢ Dictatorship: establishment of a repressive regime under the banner of
order and populist chauvinism. This regime would seek to impose a
highly controlled, corporativist marketization with strong elements of
monopoly and property ownership by the old managerial elite. We think
the chances of dictatorship in the short term are low, mainly because we
judge society to be resistant to its peaceful imposition and the likelihood
of military revolt to be low and declining. We believe the odds for
dictatorial rule would increase considerably if political and economic
stagnation set in. (A number of nongovernmental experts judge the
chances of unrest and a coup are high right now because of widespread
dissatisfaction with the general situation.) iy

For Russia to maintain itself on the path to reform, the Yel’tsin govern-
ment must address two brewing crises:

« First, it will have to assuage public unhappiness over a falling standard of
living, corruption, and blatant income disparities. To do so, it will most
likely have to give greater emphasis to the requirements of social stability
over the pace of reform—even at the risk of periodic disputes with the
IMF.

« Second, the government will have to break the stalemate over the
adoption of workable constitutional arrangements and private property
rights. The quickest path to these goals is a referendum, but this is also a
high-risk tactic, as success is by no means ensured.

We believe the maintenance of a Russian reform program will also require
a strengthening of executive authority at all levels, which will be decried by
some inside and outside Russia as antidemocratic. The critical tests will be
whether this strengthening occurs in the context of the continued establish-
ment of the rule of law, a free market, and democratic institutions. a

For at least the next six to 12 months, we see continued energetic but con-
ciliatory leadership by Yel’tsin as critical. No other regime is likely to be as
committed to rapid marketization as the present Yel’tsin/Gaydar govern-
ment. Over the longer term, however, the mark of success for democratiza-
tion will be a decrease in Yel’tsin’s role: the emergence of other national
leaders committed to similar goals, the growth of political organizations
that can mobilize support for such leaders, and development of a property-
owning class that is the foundation of a pluralistic system.

The unprecedented nature of the revolution transforming Russia, the

number and complexity of the variables involved, and Russia’s ensuing
special vulnerability to wildcard events reduces our estimative confidence.

v _ Sepia
Page-7
Yet the implications of the different paths for the United States are

£0 12958 6.lcl<tovrs Profound. If Russia moves in a positive direction, the United States will

w benefit greatly in terms of our own security, Eurasian regional stability,
and global issues, although even a democratic Russia may take actions
toward its ethnic minorities or neighbors that undermine regional stability
and conflict sharply with US aims. But, if Russia moves toward stagnation
or dictatorship, the costs to the United States in having to cope with new
security problems, regional instability, enhanced ecological dangers, and
potential economic catastrophe in Russia will be enormous,

Sessoms vi
Page-8
£0 12958
6.1le}<10Yrs
w)

£0 12958
G.1lc)<10Yrs
w)

£0 12958
6.11c)<10Yrs
w)

 

Confid
Ne OCONTRACT

Discussion

 

The collapse of the Communist political order, disin-
tegration of the command economy, and decoloniza-
tion of the Soviet empire confront Russia with social
and psychological challenges unprecedented in histo-
ry. They also open a path to a liberal political and
economic order never enjoyed by Russia in the past.
Will it take this path?

Where Russia Stands Today

The Russian people have decisively rejected Commu-
nist rule and demonstrated a desire for a free society.
They have selected representatives in elections that
were procedurally more or less fair and directly
elected their president. The new officials have gained
experience working in an increasingly free political
environment, subject to free media. So far, political
violence in Russia has been negligible. Advocates of
authoritarianism fare poorly in opinion polls and
elections.

Nevertheless, Russia has a long way to go before it
attains stable democracy and a functioning market
economy. The strong control exercised by the old
Communist political elite (the “‘nomenklatura”) over
the nomination of candidates in 1990 damaged the
legitimacy of the new parliament and elective local
government organs. The selection of leaders and the
processes of government are not yet anchored ina
developed system of competitive, broadly based politi-
cal parties. Administration at all levels is extremely
weak. There is no agreed separation of powers or
division of functions at any level. The allocation of
power between the center and the regions is sharply
contested, and local power is often concentrated in the
hands of presidentially appointed representatives. The
style of decisionmaking often deviates from demo-
cratic ideals. The entire process of government is not
yet rooted in a developed civil society, not constitu-
tionalized, and not constrained by an effective judici-
ary. Effective parliamentary, legal, and executive
constraints on internal security organs have not yet
been established.

 

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs
w

 

 

 

 

In the economy, Yel’tsin has taken painful first steps
toward replacing the command system with a market.
He has freed nearly all prices, redirected government
spending, and restrained credit expansion. Some legis-
lation authorizing structural change has been passed.
A private sector—especially in trade, services, and
agriculture—has sprung up. There is creative com-

mercial ferment across the country

Yet elements of the population and parts of the old
establishment—industrial managers, farm bureau-
crats, and local government officials—continue to
resist strongly the emerging marketplace. Property
rights are still being defined. Land is still not subject
to clear private ownership, including the rights of
purchase and sale. Price liberalization has not been
completed on some key commodities. Monopolistic
enterprises still control most of the economy. There
has been little democratically accountable privatiza-
tion of state-owned industrial enterprises. In industry
there have been considerable seizure and disposal of
enterprise assets by their managers without legally
valid title. Much of the state industrial sector has not

E0 12958 6.1{c)<10Yrs
Ww)

Copfffential
Page-9
Sesser

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs
w

been commercialized; it is still supported by subsidies.
Commercialization and privatization in other sectors
have been controlled and often stifled by local au-
thorities. Fraud and corruption are widespread in this
“nomenklatura privatization.” Morcover, individual
members of the police, security, and intelligence
services are deeply involved in the process of appropri-
ating state assets. Entrepreneurship has—often with
some justification—been linked by the public to crim-
inal activity. A convertible currency,still lies ahead.
Numerous obstacles and exactions confront Western
companies seeking business opportunities. All busi-
nessmen face capricious and conflicting regulation of

commerce. na

Some Elements of Certainty

In the next year or so, tensions are bound to increase
significantly, as unemployment grows and privatiza-
tion evokes bitter quarrels over social justice. Power-
ful pressures will be brought to bear on any Russian
Government to adopt inflationary policies and slow
the process of economic restructuring. Nationalism of
various stripes will gain momentum. Factors of
chance, the sequencing of events, and personality will
impact disproportionately upon Russia’s evolution.
Overall, the situation will remain unstable.

Yel’tsin will be hard put to maintain power and
authority in the face of the population’s exhausting
struggle for a normal existence. Russia will not be
spared the psychological “post-totalitarian depres-
sion” still widely noted in Eastern Europe. The rule of
law will come slowly. Institutionalization of progres-
sive change—not only codification, but routine accep-

tance by the population—will require ime

Yet, reversion to the previous order is not possible.
The Communist alternative is discredited. A full-
blown command economy cannot be restored. The
need to move toward some kind of market economy is
broadly accepted in principle. Restoration of a Mos-
cow-dominated empire of former Soviet republics is
beyond Russia’s military or political capabilities,
although restoration of control over subregions might

be a |

Possible Paths of Development
Over the next four years, the needs of democratization
will conflict with the imperatives of marketization.

_ Sonera

£0 12958 6.11c)<10Yrs
w

 

*£012958 6.1le)<10Vrs
w

Acceptance by the Russian population and most elites
of the requirements of marketization is relatively
weaker than their acceptance of the basic elements of
democratization. As in Eastern Europe, political lead-
ers will be under growing pressure to slow the pace of
reform and sacrifice budgetary stringency to maintain
production, sustain employment, and shore up the
social safety net. A number of Russian economists
who are committed to market reforms are neverthe-
less highly critical of the path specified by IMF
guidelines. Overall, we believe no other regime is
likely to be as committed to rapid marketization as
the present Yel’tsin/Gaydar government. Most ana-
lysts do not see the combination of dictatorship and”
liberal marketization as a live option: there is no
visible replacement elite or leader with this position,
and it lacks a base of social support. These consider-
ations underpin our identification of the type and
character of paths Russia might follow in this period:
democratization and marketization; stagnation and
possible fragmentation; and dictatorship

Path A: Democratization and Marketization. Even
under the most favorable conditions, Russia will not
achieve consolidated democracy and mature marketi-
zation within the space of four years. The system that
develops will have unique Russian characteristics. In
the near term, at least, economic difficulties are going
to get worse. But in this path we see more or less
successful continuation of present positive trends,
notwithstanding inevitable setbacks. Inflation, while
high by current Western standards, will not be out of
control. There will be real progress in democratically
privatizing trade, services, and agriculture and at
least some progress in privatizing industry. There will
be no significant return to price, wage, and other
forms of direct government management of the econo-
my. Commercial law will begin to become a reality.
And Western investment will gradually increase.
Maintenance of this path will most likely require the
strengthening of executive authority. Civilian rule will
persist, the principle of elected government will be
observed, and ethno-regional centrifugal forces will

largely be kept under conv

£0 12958 6.11c)<10Vrs
w
Page-10
£0 12958
6.1le}<10Yrs
tw)

£0 12958
6.1lc)<10¥rs
w)

 

Path B: Stagnation and Possible Fragmentation. This
path involves deadlock or failure in solving economic
problems, which feeds back into and intensifies politi-
cal problems that might otherwise move toward reso-
lution. Budget deficits return to the 1991 level of 20
percent or more of GDP, threatening hyperinflation.
The economic decline accelerates. There is little sys-
tematic progress in commercializing industry and
agriculture or overcoming economic monopolies. Pri-
vatization occurs mostly in a wildcat fashion or
through nomenklatura aggrandizement. These condi-
tions deter all but the most intrepid foreign investors.
Politically, no effective compromise is negotiated over
conflict between parliament and president or between
the center and the localities. The government’s ability
to implement policy is minimal. Law enforcement
declines, and crime continues to mount. Central au-
thority over the Russian provinces begins to evapo-
rate. Some ethnic units and regions assert outright
independence. If this trend continues, it leads to
fragmentation of the country. Local rule then be-
comes largely authoritarian, with strong elements of
local warlordism. Economic decisions are made di-
rectly by local political leaders, and interregional
trade occurs essentially on a barter basis. Armed
struggle against the rump central state, among re-
gional groupings, and across republic borders is likely.

Path C: Dictatorship. Repressive rule is instituted,
from within or outside the government, on the
grounds of combating anarchy and dismemberment of
Russia. The new regime seeks to legitimize itself
under the banner of populist chauvinism. Under some
conditions, it may present a civilian face, but the
military itself could also seize power outright. Under
any conditions, support by the military and security
forces is essential. The regime suppresses local auton-
omy, liquidates independent trade unions, and outlaws
other oppositional groups and political parties. In
their place, it tries to build corporativist structures
“representing” different social sectors. Its aim is a
tightly controlled market economy with a large state
sector; strong monopoly domination; and much direct
government control over prices, wages, allocation of
supplies, and deliveries of goods.

 

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs

A brief statement of these alternatives obviously
oversimplifies complex possibilities. We assume
strong crosscurrents among the impulses generating
these paths. Transitions from one path to another are
possible, even within our four-year time frame. Stag-
nation invites dictatorship. And dictatorship could fail

and give way to renewed democratization mal

Key Variables

Over a four-year period, estimative judgments are
very uncertain and must be conditional; we cannot
simply extrapolate current trends. The odds on the
various possible paths Russia may take depend ona
number of critical variables.

Filling the National Identity Void. The collapse of
Communism has profoundly disoriented the Russian
public, raising the question of how its nationhood will
be defined. The Yel’tsin team’s initial attempt at
forging a new sense of national identity—which has
stressed common human values, individualism, and
fusion with the civilized world—almost totally ignores
the anti-Western strain in Russian thinking. It is
already under sharp attack. Engagement of Russia in
the rough-and-tumble of international affairs, conflict
with other former Soviet republics, and its own do-
mestic restructuring are certain to generate move-
ment toward a dominant new synthesis that blends
some measure of Russian nationalism, a more collec-
tivist ethic, and defense of perceived national interests
externally. A range of possibilities is open here,
running from a liberal Russian nationalism that is
fully compatible with democracy to a less likely
xenophobic, messianic chauvinism that is “i

Public Opposition to the Social Costs of Marketiza-
tion, Shortages of food, fuel, and other consumer
necessities, rising unemployment, declining real in-
come, and anger over corruption and increasing eco-
nomic disparities are the main factors that will under-
mine public support for the steps needed to marketize
the economy. While some of these conditions may
stabilize or improve in the next year or so, some will

£0 12958 6.1[c]<10Vrs
w
Page-11
Configefitial

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs

w)

get worse. Major strikes and public unrest are highly
likely. If local elections are held in late 1992 or 1993,
or national elections are held in 1993, public dissatis-
faction may well be translated into a further weaken-
ing of parliamentary support for rapid reform. Alter-
natively, public anger may lead to prolonged
industrial paralysis and social violence, which would
directly threaten the emerging democratic order and
continuation of liberal marketization. ||

Pursuit of an Effective Economic Policy. We believe
the Russian Government’s macroeconomic policies
are laying the groundwork for necessary structural
changes. But care must be taken to prevent a decline
in production and employment in some sectors so
sharp and rapid that its destabilizing effects spin out
of control. (Some outside specialists charge that Gay-
dar’s policies are causing a decline in production that
is imposing dangerously heavy hardships on the popu-
lation.) Further, price liberalization by itself will not
automatically generate the structural changes—such
as the privatization and demonopolization—required

for a transition to a market cconomy a

Within a certain range of discretion, the government
has no choice but to balance social quiescence and
lower unemployment against higher rates of inflation
and weigh long-term stability of restructuring against
the speed of current reform action. A certain stretch-
out is possible and may prove to be necessary. These
adjustments will almost certainly provoke disputes
with the IMF and possibly private lenders:

 

There nevertheless are certain “red lines” beyond
which tactical maneuvering will be self defeating: on
prices—reimposition of controls on prices that have
already been freed; on resource allocation—a reversal
of the commitment to sharply cut military spending;
on stabilization—a budget deficit and money or
credit expansion so great that they lead to runaway
inflation; on restructuring—systematic failure to im-
plement the privatization program; on entrepreneur-
ship—a serious retraction of freedoms already grant-
ed and imposition of confiscatory taxation; and on
foreign economic relations—seriously disrupting raw
material exports and Western collaboration required
to maintain a minimal necessary level of food and
other critical imports. These dimensions of economic

£0 12958 6.1[c)<10Vrs

w)

Copfential

£0 12958 6.1[c)<10Yrs
w

policy are all highly interdependent. We believe,
however, that the single greatest threat to pursuit of a
viable economic policy will lie in pressures on the
government from all quarters to increase deficit
spending and credit expansion to the point of under-
mining the government’s capacity to maintain mini-

mum financial stability

Implementation of Economic Restructuring. The
phase of economic reform Russia is now entering
requires legally enshrining the right to private proper-
ty; extending private ownership of the means of
production on a major scale; reconfiguring the coun-
try’s industrial and agricultural capital stock—and
with this the entire pattern of employment; separating
the social support apparatus from the workplace;
building a new system of wholesale trade within
Russia and between Russia and the other former
Soviet republics; and opening the economy to the
world. Over the next year, unemployment will rise
sharply, and in some regions it will reach dangerously
high levels. In the best possible case, there are bound.
to be enormous inertia and resistance in each area of
structural reform. The conversion to civilian produc-
tion of defense industry—which constitutes such a
large proportion of Russia’s manufacturing capaci-
ty~-presents huge economic and social problems.
Dilemmas of an equal or greater magnitude exist in
creating an economically effective agricultural sector.
Disputes over equity and social justice will delay
change. The prerequisites for market operation at the
microlevel are not all in place—far from it. Decision-
makers rightly fear the social consequences of rapid
restructuring. And there are powerful vested interests
in the status quo on the part of state sector managers,
local officials, and the middle and older generations of

the population at lore

The completion of Russia’s economic restructuring
will take many years. By 1996, it is almost certain
that a large monopoly-ridden state industrial sector
and major remnants of the collective farming struc-
ture will still exist. The question is: what will be the °
trend of restructuring? Depending on how the em-
ployment problem is handled, how privatization takes

EO 12958 6.1(c)<10Yrs
Page-12
£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs
w)

place, how broadly the private sector begins to develop
in manufacturing, and other factors, we see restruc-
turing moving in three possible directions: (1) toward a
new statism, with widescale “nomenklatura privatiza-
tion,” major continuing subsidization of heavy and
defense industry, and little increase in competition; (2)
toward no coherent pattern; or (3) toward a more
liberal mixed economy beginning to show signs of
competitiveness and genuine autonomy from the state.

Maintaining Political Moderation. The struggle of
organized political forces will greatly affect Russia’s
path of development. In general, we are not impressed
by the current capacity of extremist forces on either
the “right” or “left” to overthrow the present political
order. Elections, polls, and turnouts for demonstra-
tions have shown that the public does not support
radical extremism and is highly unlikely to vote for a
fascist regime. The still omnipresent former Commu-
nist elite is a brake on change and a source of policy
sabotage that can significantly retard reform at the
center and the regional level. Nonetheless, it is not
homogeneous in its concerns, and many of its mem-
bers are interested less in reversing the post-August
1991 changes than in exploiting them to their own
benefit :

In our judgment, the most serious threat to successful
pursuit of democratization and marketization lies not
among extremists but within the parliamentary main-
stream and some quarters of the government itself, in
tendencies toward “populism” and national chauvin-
ism. The former represents an inclination to unre-
strained deficit spending and credit expansion. The
latter represents a striving to resolve differences with
non-Russian communities in Russia or attempts to
support Russian minorities in other former republics
in ways that would violate the sovereignty of these
republics and could be sustained only through force.
To some extent both tendencies reflect pressures that
elected officials feel from their constituents and their
effort to adjust correspondingly. If populism gains the
upper hand, Russia will move toward hyperinflation
and political crisis. If national chauvinism becomes
more pronounced, it is likely to prompt the employ-
ment of threats or coercion against non-Russian “au-
tonomous” regions in the Russian Republic and

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Yrs
w

Con:

 

E0 12958 6.1(c}<10Yrs
w)

against former republics of the USSR in ways that
are likely to shift the balance of power in favor of
groups hostile to liberal reform, distort the political
agenda and distract the country’s leadership (or even
force a change in it), unleash new inflation, compli-
cate Russia’s external economic ties, and increase the
danger of direct military intervention in Russian

volitics. a

Possible Military Revolt. Prevention of both military
disintegration and military intervention in politics is
an essential condition of democratization and marke-
tization in Russia. New civilian control mechanisms
are still embryonic. The Russian officer corps is
frustrated and angry. It has become politicized to an
unprecedented degree. The military could act in ways
harmful to democratization and marketization. If
their situation worsens, district-level military leaders
could take unilateral action in sensitive areas like the
Baltic states, the Black Sea, the Caucasus, or other
borderland regions that could precipitate a crisis
between Russia and other former Soviet republics. If
the military’s material welfare deteriorates further,
individual units may increasingly ignore orders, seize
supplies, form alliances with local leaders, or even
take power locally. Most analysts believe that, under
conditions of greater political and economic stress
than exist today, elements of the military high com-
mand might overcome their internal divisions and fear
of precipitating civil war and either support a civilian-
led coup or try to seize power themselves. Some
analysts think that erosion of military cohesion has
already progressed too far to permit a straight mili-
tary coup.

Presidential Leadership. Despite some decline in his
popularity rating, Yel’tsin still enjoys a legitimacy
that is unlikely to be matched by any other leader in
the near future. His forceful leadership has been
essential to progress so far in both democratization
and economic reform. His willingness to compromise
has also been a key ingredient of his success.

 

£0 12958 3.4(b)(1]>25Yrs
(e)
Page-13
Con:

 

£0 12958 1.5(¢)<10Yrs

Most analysts believe that, if Yel’tsin did leave the
scene, his successor—whether Rutskoy or someone
else—would certainly have trouble at the outset in
pursuing as strong a policy on marketization as his
and would be less able or willing to effect the
compromises required to keep relations with ethnic
minorities and the former republics on an even keel
(see inset). After a startup period and some backslid-
ing, a successor might—depending on when he as-
sumed office and the context—gain stature and be
able then to exercise strong presidential authority.

Yeltsin is likely to be the President of Russia through
the end of his term in 1996. But the possibility that
his term could be cut short by a health crisis,
assassination, or a coup cannot be discounted. Assum-
ing he stays in office, the question is: will he continue
to provide the presidential leadership that is required
for Russia to stay on the path of democratization and

£0 12958 6.1[c)<10Vrs

w)

Contents

  

 

 

£0 12958
G6.1lc)<10Yrs
w)

£0 12958
6.1lc}<10Yrs
w)

 

 

marketization? A near-term political crisis is brewing
and will probably confront Yel’tsin, as resistance to
his economic reform policies intensifies and attempts
continue to narrow his presidential authority through
passage of a new constitution that would entrench
parliamentary power. He needs a “presidential party”
or—at a minimum—a better organized faction in
parliament, but so far he is not moving seriously to
create either. If he survives this crisis, which is
probable, it is likely nonetheless that, by 1994 or so,
rising unemployment, strikes, corruption, and crime
Page-14
£0 12958
6.1lc)<10Vrs
w

£0 12958
6.1lc}<10Yrs
wu)

£012958
6.1lc)<10Vrs
w

 

will have drained away a good deal of his popular
appeal. A few analysts believe that, at some point in
this process, Yel’tsin might go beyond strong execu-
tive rule and embark on the path of dictatorship. Most
believe that the evidence concerning Yel’tsin’s inclina-
tions is to the contrary and that, in any event, he
would be highly unlikely to attempt to destroy the
electoral foundation on which his own authority is
based—thereby placing himself in the same untenable
position once occupied by Gorbachev.

The Capacity To Govern. Currently, Russia is poorly
governed. Improving this situation and creating condi-
tions for the rule of law depend, first of all, upon
resolving conflict over whether the country should
adopt “parliamentary” or “presidential” rule and over
what sort of regional devolution of power should
occur. Most analysts believe that—under conditions
of continued nomenklatura control of many localities,
divisive ethnic and regional tendencies, and depen-
dence of economic progress on adoption and imple-
mentation of extremely painful policies—successful
pursuit of an effective marketization strategy will
require, for the present at least, the adoption of a

systein of government_embodying strong executive
authority at all ioe ll

So far, settlement of this conflict has been frustrated
by a parliamentary battle over competing drafts of a
new constitution, a power struggle between the legis-
lature and the presidency, and efforts by ethnic
autonomous regions to expand their jurisdiction.
Yel’tsin has been attempting to deal with this situa-
tion by seeking compromise in the existing parliamen-
tary arena, but he now appears to be moving toward
bypassing the parliament via a referendum on presi-
dential power and the constitution—a high-risk strat-
egy of direct confrontation. A failed attempt at a
referendum could well be the beginning of the end for
the Yel’tsin government. Should Yel’tsin win, whatev-
er his tactics, it will remain unclear how rapidly many
other obstacles to effective government can be elimi-

nated

Centrifugal Forces. Developments as diverse as the
imposition of provincial and even city “export” con-
trols, efforts to promote regional autonomy in Siberia
and the Far East, and serious ethnic separatism in the

 

Consent

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Yrs
w

North Caucasus and Tatarstan pose an immediate
problem of the governability of Russia and a potential
threat to the territorial integrity of the country. There
has been an important shift of taxing power to the
localities. Moscow has made deals with individual
provinces, granting various privileges and immuni-
ties—partly to pacify local discontent with the center,
partly to relieve the central budget of deficit-produc-
ing spending obligations, but also as a byproduct of a
deliberate effort to dismantle the highly centralized
Soviet state economic apparatus. The net result has

been weakened central as |

Will this trend continue? Regional separatism repre-
sents a threat to Russian stability over the next few
years. There are indeed similarities between the
USSR’s disintegration and patterns now evident with-
in Russia: the ethnic diversity, economic grievances,
the escalating “sovereignty” demands, the removal of
the glue provided by the Communist Party, the
breakdown of central power levers, the successful
defiance of the center by the localities, and the
problematic effectiveness of either negotiation or co-
ercion in stabilizing the situation. In some cases,
concessions have simply whetted the appetite of the
ethnic and other regions for more and more autonomy
up to independence. Nevertheless, the Russian leader-
ship has key political advantages that the old Soviet
leadership lacked: the weight of ethnic Russians in the
population and their close identification with the
Russian state; the limited aims of most non-Russian
groups; possible solution to the struggles over econom-
ic jurisdiction; and the physical, economic, and securi-
ty dependency of almost all regions on Russia. So long
as stagnation at the center can be avoided, the
problem of centrifugalism can be effectively man-
aged, if perhaps never fully “solved.” A lapse into
stagnation at the center, however, could open the door

to fragmentation

Relations With Former Soviet Republics. The pres-
ence of large Russian minority populations in the
other former Soviet republics, the Russian military
presence in the Baltic states and elsewhere, emerging
territorial claims, the dividing up of military and

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs
w)

cope
Page-15
Cor ial

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs
EO 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs w
w

 

other assets, the formation of national armies, con-
flicts of economic interest, and the weight of past
ethnic grievances pose the problem of avoiding a
serious worsening of relations between Russia and the

other new states. | |

Although many permutations in relations between
Russia and the other former Soviet republics are
possible, we believe the key factor impacting on
Russia’s prospects for democratization and marketi-
zation over the next four years will be the degree and
severity of armed confrontation and violence—wheth-
er provoked by Russia or by another republic. The
character of what is likely to be continuing conflict
with Ukraine is central in this respect. ||

There is a possibility of problems with Russian minor-
ities in Central Asia, the Caucasus, the Baltic states,
and Moldova degenerating to such a point as to invite
Russian intervention as well as an accelerated flow of
refugees to Russia. Similarly, economic relations
among members of the Commonwealth of Indepen-
dent States (CIS) could break down further. But we
do not think either process would be so pronounced as
to undermine reform in Russia or the authority of the

current leadership. ; |

We think there is a greater risk of relations between
Russia and Ukraine deteriorating sharply over key
issues such as the Crimea, the Black Sea Fleet and
other military assets, and the division of old Union
properties. However, we doubt that an initial skirmish
between Ukrainian and Russian forces over, say, the
Black Sea Fleet or Crimea would grow into a large-
scale armed conflict: the leaderships of both countries which we must remain agnostic, and none in which
recognize this would jeopardize their domestic reform the pessimistic outcome is most likely. The number of

 

 

 

 

 

programs; neither side’s militaries are positioned or these variables and their interconnectedness suggest
eager to conduct hostilities against the other; and the that high confidence in predictive judgments about
lack of deep-seated religious or ethnic animosities Russia’s future is not warranted |

between Russians and Ukrainians make it doubtful
that popular support for a conflict could be sustained. The Likelihood of Democratization and Marketiza-
Consequently, we believe that Russian-Ukrainian dif- tion. The chances of Russia’s pursuing the path of

ferences can be kept at a level that does not doom democratization and marketization depend in the

reform,| economic sphere on the government’s capacity to
resist financial destabilization, to proceed with the

The Likelihood of Different Paths commercialization and privatization of the economy

Our review of critical variables reveals several areas in a manner that enjoys some public support, and at
in which we can lean toward optimism, a majority in

£0 12958 6.1{c)<10Vrs
w)

EO 12958 6.1(c}<10Yrs
w)

Confidential 8
Page-16
EO 12958 6.1(c)<10¥rs

w)

the same time to prevent further steep declines in
production and cushion the effects of unemployment
and other forms of social dislocation. We believe that,
if the Russian government manages its policy trade-
offs wisely and is not suddenly burdened with the sort
of major economic costs that could spring from new
Chernobyl’-type disasters, the problems in achieving
these objectives are not insuperable. The government
will constantly face the quandary of how much it can
deviate from IMF standards and yet get support, but
its policies should still allow the country to move
forward.

Politically, the government needs to:

Work out a distribution of institutional power that

preserves democratic processes while strengthening

executive authority to carry through painful

reforms.

Keep strikes and social violence toa minimum.

Prevent military disintegration or revolt.

Avoid the political temptations of extreme populism

or chauvinism.

Contain peacefully pressures for regional and ethnic

separatism.

© Prevent relations with other former Soviet republics
from turning violent.|

Russian society must also continue to develop in a

liberal democratic direction. Entrepreneurship must
grow, democratic institutions must be strengthened,
and the end of the empire must be accepted.

 

These are formidable but not impossible require-
ments. Public endurance of adversity so far is a
hopeful sign. A constitutional consensus may emerge,
stabilizing the separation of powers and allocation of
government functions, while delivering a viable feder-
alism through a significant devolution of power to the
localities and probable side deals between Russia and
several recalcitrant autonomous republics. Most ana-
lysts believe the chances are good that the creation of
a Russian ministry of defense and Russian army and
steps by the government to improve military welfare
will gradually strengthen civilian control and reduce
the likelihood of extraconstitutional action by the
military. Whether chauvinistic tendencies become
stronger in Russian policy is problematic: we think the

£0 12958 6.1[c)<10Vrs

w)

Configefitial

EO 12958 6.1c}<10Vrs
w

dominant trend will be the consolidation of a moder-
ate nonimperalistic sense of Russian nationalism, but
xenophobic currents could be stimulated by various
developments—including the activities of neighbors
and conflicts between the latter and their Russian
minorities. A majority of analysts think that economic
logic and the interests of most incumbent republic
leadership groups in stability should favor the devel-
opment of peaceful relations between Russia and
other republics, but the conflicts that do exist arouse
intense passions and can escape control by the repub-
lic governments.

Western policy can play a significant role in promot-
ing democratization and marketization. Economic
and technical assistance is central; but the West can
help in many other ways by recognizing that the
liberal, democratic ethos that can develop in Russia
will be different from our own; being sensitive to the
potential for misinterpretation or misuse of Western
military, intelligence, political, or economic actions by
nationalist extremists; strengthening the hand of mod-
erates in the military and the pursuit of military
reform; encouraging the observance of human rights
inside the country while discouraging outside support
of secessionist elements; and fostering conciliation in
conflicts between Russia and other former Soviet

republics, first of all Ukraine.

Of all the factors that can increase the chances of
Russian pursuit of democratization and marketization
over the near term, none affects a broader range of
variables than the provision of strong but conciliatory
leadership by the Russian President. This factor is
especially important over the next six to 12 months,
when Russia’s future political system will still be
jelling and social instability will be deepening. There
is a good chance that, even though his authority may
wane, Yel’tsin will be able to meet the political
challenges that confront him and offer such leader-
ship in this period. Over the longer term, however, the
mark of success for democratization will be a decrease
in his or any leader’s personal role, reflected in the
institutionalization of the presidency, the emergence

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs
w)

Confjdéntial
Page-17
EO
w

 
 
 

Confidential

958 6.11c}<10Vrs

of other national leaders committed to the same goals,
the development of political organizations that can
mobilize support for such leaders, and the growth of a
property-owning class that is the foundation of a
pluralistic system. If Yel’tsin continues to provide
strong presidential leadership, most analysts think the
chances are slightly better than even that Russia will
stick to this path. Absent such presidential leadership,
they believe the chances would decline sharply.

The Likelihood of Stagnation and Fragmentation.
Most analysts believe that stagnation is likely to be
the outcome if the Russian political process rejects
strong executive authority and populism undercuts the
Gaydar line in economic policy. They think the
chances of these developments occurring are about

a |

Most analysts agree that a breakup of the Russian
Republic could occur if the downward economic spiral
produces sudden and massive unemployment and a
further sharp drop in living standards, if the political
struggle between reformers and traditionalists be-
comes still more closely aligned with the pattern of
ethno-territorial conflict, and if the military frag-
ments along regional lines—all highly possible under
stagnation. Analysts disagree over whether, before
these conditions permit fragmentation, Moscow would
attempt to save the day by intervening with force.
Provided it did so and only isolated regions were
involved, democracy in the country as a whole would
probably survive in some form or other. But terrorism
and guerilla warfare would become highly likely—
complicating Russian politics, further impeding politi-
cal and economic reform, and probably impacting
negatively on Russia’s foreign policy and relations
with the southern-tier CIS states. ma

The Likelihood of Dictatorship. We think replace-
ment of the present order by a dictatorship today
would most likely occur through a coup and judge the
chances for this in the short term to be low. If Russia
were beset by mass violence, anarchy, actual dismem-
berment, or war, however, dictatorship could come
about with popular acceptance. Civilian politicians—
led, say, by Rutskoy and drawing on the military-
industrial complex—would most likely initiate such a
seizure of power. Any dictatorship could

EO 12958 6.1(c]<10Yrs

Sse

E0 12958 6.1{c}<10Yrs

w

exist only on the sufferance of the military and—to a
lesser degree—of the security forces. As we have
argued above, most analysts believe the chances of
military revolt are currently low and declining. They
therefore think that the odds on a military-driven
switch to dictatorship are low. If the presidency
ceased to provide strong leadership and stagnation set
in, the chances for dictatorship would increase consid-

a

Indicators of Progress. Key indicators of progress will
be consolidation of a healthy, nonextremist Russian
patriotism; persistence of a degree of popular political
patience and absence of paralyzing strikes or protract-
ed mass unrest; cessation, or dramatic slowing, of the
decline in economic production and the standard of
living; avoidance by the government of financial
destabilization and achievement of at least gradual
success in effecting commercialization, privatization,
and competition; achievement of consensus on new
constitutional arrangements that regulate conflict
over the form of rule and federalism; success in
institutionalizing civilian control structures over the
military and in addressing their social and material
concerns; and the exercise by Russian elites of self-
control in conflicts with the former Soviet republics
that could undermine Russia’s own capacity to pursue
reform. If, on the other hand, Russia begins to slide
toward stagnation or worse, we would expect to see an
inability by the government to push through constitu-
tional change, a severe aggravation of the economic
crisis and an attendant rise in social unrest, and the
growth of centrifugal forces.

 

Implications for the United States

Over the next four years, Russia will remain very
unstable, presenting the United States with great
uncertainties. Under the best conditions, there will be
serious crises and turmoil between now and 1996.

If Russia remains on a democratic track, this will be
highly beneficial for the United States. It will strongly
reinforce the gains we have already achieved in our
own security, increase the likelihood of positive
changes in other CIS countries, and enhance the

£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs

w

10
Page-18
£0 12958 6.1(c)<10Vrs

w)

prospects for progress on Eurasian regional and global
issues. But Yel’tsin and his foreign policy team are
already being accused of slavishly following Western
dictates. Even a democratic future Russian govern-
ment will increasingly define its national interests in a
more independent manner and bargain harder in
bilateral and multilateral negotiations. Russian inter-
ests are not identical with those of the United States,
and even a democratic Russia may take actions
toward its ethnic minorities or neighbors that conflict
sharply with US aims.

Tf Russia stagnates, there will be more likelihood of
violations of human rights, greater vulnerability to
chauvinist demagogy, and a higher probability of
intensified conflict with neighbors. Russia will be
much less able to conduct a coherent foreign policy.
Its capacity to deal with nuclear weapon problems and
potential sources of ecological catastrophe will de-
cline. Its demands for Western assistance will proba-
bly increase, while its capacity to work out its own
problems will decline sharply. If stagnation leads in
turn to fragmentation, Moscow could lose control over
some nuclear weapons. The threat of new ecological
disasters—especially at nuclear power plants—will
rise significantly. Possible civil war, cross-border hos-
tilities, economic catastrophe, and widespread hunger
will confront the United States with a broad array of
difficult, no-win policy options,

£0 12958 6.1{c)<10Vrs
w

Confidential

Russia will not regain its status as a global power
under dictatorship. Because such a regime is unlikely
to solve its underlying economic problems, it will
remain basically unstable and will have a limited life
expectancy. Nevertheless, it will probably pose region-
al threats and adopt a more menacing strategic
nuclear posture toward the United States. It is likely
that it will be more inclined to resort to shows of force
or subversion against its neighbors, such as Ukraine.
It may seize territory that it considers to be historical-
ly its own, such as northern Kazakhstan. And it may
engage in other military activities along its periphery
that would generate major regional instability and

embroil the United States. ||

EO 12958 6.1lc}<10Vrs
w

Conse
Page-19
Configefttial :