
Page-1
ues
SE NIE 20/30-70 C
LED DISSEM 14 November ,1970 Ce

45
tS
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE (ec i

_NUMBER 20/30-70

Security of Oil Supply
to NATO and Japan

   
  

Submitted by ' w

 

   
 

: “Authenticated: fa ee
nee PE : Sees APPROVED-FOR RELEASE
DATE: NOW 2000 ‘

SE gor fl NG
ED DISSEM

 

NO |. 457

FODMO) 180
Page-2
i
|
|

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:
Lt. Gen. R. E. Cushman, Jr., USMC, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Dr. Ray $. Cline, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Lt. Gen. Donald V. Bennett, the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Dr. Louis W. Tordella, for the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:
Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. William ©. Cregar, for the Assistant to the Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction. .

 

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

 

GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

 

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
OATE: NOW 2000
Page-3
—_——

CONTENTS

SCOPE NOTE
CONCLUSIONS
DISCUSSION
I. THE PRESENT SITUATION
Il. THE TANKER SITUATION

A. Prospects for Reopening the Suez Canal
B. World Tanker Capacity to 1975

111. THE USSR AND MIDDLE EAST OIL

A. The Growth in Soviet Political Influence
B. The Soviet Role in Oil

Page

IV. CHANGING PATTERNS OF OWNERSHIP AND PRODUCTION 13

V. CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH THE FLOW OF MIDDLE EAST

OIL MIGHT BE INTERRUPTED

A. General Considerations

B. Special Cases .
C. The Arab-Israeli Issue

D. Interstate Political Rivalry
E. In Sum

ANNEX

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: NOW 2000
Page-4
OIL SUPPLY ROUTES TO NORTHERN EUROPE

 

  
  

    

 

ne =
LU ig oneece amNY

700, ony
ROUND TRIP ies 26 aye —

saint og |

    

=

 
    
   

ALGERIA

   

ROUND TRIP
12.300 Wiles~26 Days

20uv0 rR
4400 ies 15 ON

   
 

Nato Member Country

Eastern European
Communist Country

Area of oll production

Ott pipeline

 

001070 ee , APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: NOW 2000
Page-5
SECURITY OF OIL SUPPLY
TO NATO AND JAPAN

SCOPE NOTE

This Estimate discusses oil supply to Western Europe and Japan
through 1975, and as far beyond that as possible. It also discusses the
tanker situation, the role of the USSR and Eastern Europe in Middle
Eastern oil matters, and prospective changes in the control of pro-
duction and distribution of oil. It examines the conditions, short of
general war, under which the flow of Middle Eastern’ oil to NATO
and Japan might be interrupted and assesses the impact of an inter-
ruption of oil flow from certain producing countries.

 

CONCLUSIONS

A. The European NATO countries and Japan consume imported
oil in enormous quantities—over 10 million and 3.8 million barrels
per day (bpd) respectively. Europe’s reserve stocks are limited and
unevenly distributed; and low sulfur (low pollution) industrial fuel
oil is in short supply. The Syrian shutdown of TAPLINE (which
brought Saudi oil to the Mediterranean) and production cuts in Libya
have caused a strain on the world’s tanker fleet, which has had to
haul more oil from the distant Persian Gulf, without benefit of the
Suez Canal.

B. The antagonism between Egypt and Israel appears to preclude
the Canal’s opening in the foreseeable future. Even so, we estimate
that there will be enough tanker capacity to move oil from the pro-
ducing countries to consumers during the next year, provided that
there is no substantial decrease in the availability of short-hauheMegion RELEASE

"In this paper, the term Middle East is used to include all the Arab stat HATE NOY 2900

North African ones, and Iran.
oor 1
Page-6
of

terranean oil. The present tight tanker market, should ease substan-
tially by mid-1971, because of new deliveries, and the increase in com-
bined carriers expected to be available by the end of that year would
provide a comfortable spare capacity.

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

C. The expansion of Soviet political influence in the Middle East
has not been accompanied by any significant Soviet role in oil matters.
There are compelling practical considerations that will continue to
limit such Soviet participation; these include nationalistic attitudes
in the oil producing states and the shortcomings of the Soviet oil in-
dustry. While the USSR will be able to produce enough oil to cover
its domestic demand up to 1980, it would probably have to import
about 1.5 million bpd from the Middle East if it is to provide most
of the oil required by Eastern Europe and to export to other markets
at present levels. The Soviets are unlikely to try to deny Middle
Eastern oil to NATO or Japan, since the political and economic costs
to the USSR of any such efforts would be prohibitive. It is possible,
however, that the Soviets will gain an increasingly significant position
in the oil industry in the Arab states over the long run.

D. There will be growing pressures over the next five to 10 years
by the oil producing states to gain control over their oil production.
By the end of the 1970s a substantial portion of production is likely
to be under the control of the host governments. The traditional role
of the international oil companies will probably be diminished and
direct dealings between consuming and producing countries are likely
to account for an increasing amount of the oil moving between them.

E. Although several past interruptions of Middle East oil flow
have arisen in the Arab-Israeli context, others have been caused by
political antagonisms between Arab states themselves. All in all, the
oil producing countries, irrespective of their political ideology, have
been motivated primarily by a desire for more income. They are
heavily dependent on oil revenues to run their economies and hence
are not likely to use denial of their oil as a political weapon against
Western Europe or Japan.

F. Nevertheless, one or another major oil producing state coul
decide to risk its oil revenue for political ends. Seizure of all US (and

prema
Page-7
oO

or UK) oil operations in a major producing country would seriously
disturb oil shipments for some months. NATO countries affected by
such a move would act quickly to insure effectiveness of alternative
arrangements for getting oil from producing countries. Syrian an-
tagonism toward Iraq is likely to interrupt the flow of Iraqi oil at some
time during the next five years.

G. In the event of a resumption of Arab-Israeli hostilities, some
interruption of oil shipments seems almost certain. In such circum-
stances, moreover, one or more of the Arab oil producing countries
might move directly against US oil companies, and US financial in-
terests could be hurt badly. Sabotage attempts by Palestinian guerrillas
are likely to occur in the foreseeable future. Although their effects
could be serious they are not likely to cause a long lasting interruption
of oil flow.

H. Certain specific contingencies involving interruptions in oil
shipments to Western Europe and Japan are discussed at Annex.

DISCUSSION
|. THE PRESENT SITUATION

1. Although oil is the principal source of energy for the non-Communist world,
two of the major consuming areas, Europe and Japan, have virtually no domestic
oil supplies. At present, half of Western Europe's oil comes from east of Suez,
another 30 percent from North Africa, and the rest from West Africa, the USSR
and the Caribbean. Japan gets 90 percent of its oil from the Persian Gulf—
roughly half from Iran and half from Arab states there. Uninterrupted access
to adequate oil supplies is a vital matter for the Europeans and the Japanese.
This situation of dependence will prevail for the foreseeable future. Even
though oil has been discovered in the North Sea in commercial quantities, the
known reserves are not large enough to supply more than a minor share of the
European market during the period of this Estimate. Japan has no oil reserves,
although there are indications that oil in commercial quantities may be available
in the China Sea. New discoveries in Indonesia may contribute significant sup-
plies nearer at hand than the Persian Gulf.

 

2. The quantities of oil consumed in the European NATO countries and in
Japan are formidable and have been growing at spectacular rates. The former

*The US, by contrast, now produces about three-fourths of the oil it oes EMG

rest comes from nearby countries, only three percent of US consumption co!
Middle East and Africa. The USSR is wholly self-sufficient in oil.

a 3
Page-8
oe

consumed over 10 million barrels of oil a day in 1970; the latter 3.8 million barrels
per day (bpd). The growth of oil consumption for European NATO countries
averaged about 11 percent a year in the past five years, while that of Japan has
averaged 13% percent over the same period. This growth has presented and
will continue to present problems to the oil industry. The quantities of oil in-
volved are so large that a single percentage point in the European figures alone
amounts to 100,000 bpd; to transport this quantity of oil from the Persian Culf
around Africa to Northern Europe requires about 70 T-2s.*

3. Over the past several months oil supplies in Europe have tightened
markedly; Western Europe has already experienced shortages and rises in prices
of some oil products, as European consumption has grown in the 1965-1970
period more than had been foreseen by the oil companies, For one thing, the
shift from coal, Europe's traditional source of energy, to oil occurred at a much
faster rate than economic planners had anticipated, In addition, pollution re-
strictions designed to cut down emissions of sulfur put a premium on low-sulfur
oils. Those crude oils which are low in sulfur, principally from North and West
Africa, yield less fuel oil than the average Middle Eastern crude with higher
sulfur content. The oil industry after June 1967 had adjusted to the closing of
the Suez Canal by turing to ever larger and more efficient tankers for the
long haul around Africa, These have not proved adequate, however, in the
face of reduced availability of short-haul oil in recent months and the world’s
tanker fleet is now under considerable strain.

4. TAPLINE had been carrying about 500,000 bpd to the Mediterranean from
Saudi Arabia. It was shut down in May 1970 after what appears to have been an
accidental break, and the Syrian Government has not agreed to terms for re-
pairing and reopening it. Early in the summer, the Libyan regime imposed
successive cuts in production on several oil companies. Together, these two
developments cut the availability of oil at terminals on the Mediterranean coast
by over a million bpd, at their maximum impact. To transport oil from the
Persian Gulf to Europe, as long as the Suez Canal is closed, requires five to
six times the tanker capacity that is needed to move an equivalent amount of
oil from the Mediterranean. The Libyan cutbacks and TAPLINE’s closing vir-
tually exhausted unused capacity in the world’s existing tanker fleet, causing
sharp rises in new charter fees.

 

 

°The T-2 tanker is a 16,765 deadweight tons (DWT) vessel with a speed of 14.5 knots.
Tanker availability and employment is commonly expressed in T-2 equivalents (expressed
T-2s), and this terminology is employed in this Estimate. A T-2 tanker would carry about
125,000 barrels of oi] (there are about 7.5 barrels to the ton). DWT is defined as the gross
weight of a vessel less the weight of hull and machinery; it approximates the vessel's cargo
carrying capacity.

‘The Israeli pipeline between the Gulf of Aqaba and the Mediterranean has a capacity\PPROVED FOR RELEASE
of 400,000 bpd, but its current throughput is estimated at only around 250,000 bpd. Mosiare: HOW 2000
oil producing companies which have interests in Arab states are unwilling to use the pipeline”
because of Arab regulations.

4 wr
Page-9
omer

5. The West European countries, aware of their vulnerability to disruption of
supplies, have for many years been concerned with maintaining adequate re-
serve stocks of oil. These countries have as a goal the achievement of a 90 day
oil reserve for Western Europe as a whole, but few have achieved it. Statistics
on stocks are incomplete and unreliable; reporting varies in quality, coverage,
and definitions, and different reporters employ different data bases. An Organ-
ization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) report of 1 July
1970 estimates a 75 day stockpile for Western Europe. Other sources consider 45
days a more realistic figure. A more precise figure of European oil stocks is not
presently available. European oil stocks fluctuate seasonally, going down about
15 days in the winter months and being replenished during the summer. The
TAPLINE and Libyan developments have slowed restoration of reserves during
the past summer to some extent, although probably not by more than a few days
consumption. Moreover, oil stocks are not evenly distributed throughout the
countries of Western Europe and already there have been shortages of certain
products in some countries. Japan in the past has not kept oil stocks up to a
60 day supply; in mid-1970 its stocks may have been around 45 days.

6. Spare production of nearly 3 million bpd of oil is still available in the
Middle East, but most of it is in the Persian Gulf. This spare capacity represents
a much smaller fraction of world consumption than was the case in the crises
which closed the Suez Canal in 1956 and in 1967. In addition, the position of
the US as a relatively close alternative source of oil for Western Europe has
about vanished. Whereas in 1960 the US had stand by production equal to about
60 percent of European consumption, today it has little stand by production
which could be made available quickly to Europe.

 

7. Demand for oil in the non-Communist world has risen at about 7.7 per-
cent annually in the past 10 years. Demand will continue to grow, but probably
at a somewhat lower rate. Growth rates of oil consumption have already begun
to decline in Western Europe. The rate of conversion from coal to oil is slowing,
and natural gas continues to do better than hold its own as an energy source. Oil
industry sources talk of a 6 percent average annual growth rate through 1975.
The oil industry, however, has usually been on the low side in forecasting long-
term growth. We think that average annual growth for 1971-1975 is more likely
to be around 7 percent world-wide, This implies a growth of almost 8 percent
in Western Europe, 4 percent in the US, and about 14 percent in Japan. Table I
shows the quantities of oil that will be in demand at these two rates and also
at 8 percent, although total world demand is unlikely to go that high.

 

Il. THE TANKER SITUATION

A. Prospects for Reopening the Suez Canal APPROVED FOR RELEASE

8. A basic reason for the tight tanker situation is that the Suez ARTE Noy 2000
mains closed. While many of the large tankers now in use or under construc-

i
i
'
'
i
Page-10
oe

tion are too big to pass through the Canal (before the June war, tankers of
about 65,000 DWT could transit loaded and ones of about 150,000 DWT in
ballast), its opening would provide additional flexibility in tanker movements.
Shortening the route from Europe to the Persian Gulf would increase tanker
transport capacity by the equivalent of about 800 T-2s, adding 8-9 percent to
the world tanker fleet. How likely is it that the Suez Canal will be opened :
by 1975? :

9. The physical task of opening the Suez Canal to shipping is not over-
whelming. There are some 15 vessels of varying size sunk in the Canal. In addi-

 

tion to removing these vessels, some dredging would be required, although {
without the wash of moving ships, sedimentation probably has amounted to

only half a foot or so on the average. In the absence of a thorough physical (
survey since the June 1967 war, estimates of the time and cost needed to put ‘

the Canal back in operation range from 4-6 months at a cost of $12-$15 million
to over a year at $30-$35 million.

10. Of the parties directly concerned with the Canal, Israel has little economic
interest in having it open and has a very heavy political stake in ensuring that
the Canal does not open unless its flag vessels can use the waterway. Tel Aviv
regards its military position along the east bank as important for holding its
position in Sinai, and holding Sinai as a prime means of exerting pressure on
Egypt to come to terms on an overall settlement. As long as Israel’s forces hold
the east bank, it can prevent the Canal from being used. Israel would forcibly
resist any effort to open the Canal without its consent.

11. Egypt's interest is more complex. In the last full year (1966) of the Suez
Canal’s operation, Egypt earned about $220 million in foreign exchange from
tolls, This sum has been more than compensated for by subsidies, agreed to at
the 1967 Khartoum Arab Summit Conference, from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and
Libya. Egypt suffers certain economic disadvantages from a closed Canal; e¢.g.,
most of its oil production is on the wrong (southern) end of the waterway.
Even if the Khartoum subsidies largely or totally disappeared, we believe that
Egypt would choose to forego income from the Canal (which, at least in
the near term, would be significantly less than it was before June 1967) rather
than make money by opening it while Israel continued to occupy its eastern
bank. Egypt wants to regain control of Sinai. Egypt might agree to open the
Canal on terms short of a comprehensive settlement, e.g,, if Israeli forces with-
drew from the eastern bank, but even this is unlikely.

    

12. The USSR has experienced some political, strategic, and economic in-
convenience from the Canal’s closure. Its military and economic aid to South
‘Asia and to Vietnam have had either to make the long journey around Africa
or go overland. Its naval vessels similarly must make long voyages to show the
flag in the Indian Ocean, and the USSR is unable to augment its Indian Socdmoven ror ease
squadron in reaction to short-term crises in the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. ”

LAMAN MENTE ETE

\
Page-11
aor

An open Canal would ease these strains on Soviet maritime activity, adding the
equivalent of five percent (in DWT) to the USSR’s merchant fleet. Yet, the
Soviet interest in an open Canal is not so great as to induce the USSR to en-
danger its position in Egypt. The Soviets almost certainly hope for a settlement
which would allow the Canal to be opened, but in our judgment, Moscow
wouid not put heavy pressure on Cairo to modify significantly its terms for a
settlement primarily to get the Canal back in operation. Nor do we think that
the USSR would assess the benefits of an open Canal as worth the risk of trying
to open it by force.

13. Other former users of the Canal have been hurt, but perforce have ad-
justed to its being closed. While most countries would welcome the Canal’s
reopening, none of the users regards an open Canal as vital to their interests,
nor does any of them have much leverage to exert if it wanted to get the Canal
open. For all the above reasons, we expect the Canal to remain closed until
some sort of Egyptian-Israeli settlement is reached. Such a settlement appears
remote, but if it ever does come about, it will be achieved for reasons which
have relatively little to do with the Canal as a route for ship passage. The dis-
cussion of future oil tanker requirements below assumes that the Canal remains

closed.

B. World Tanker Capacity to 1975

14. In mid-1970, there was an oil tanker apacity of 9,354 T-2s available to
the non-Communist world. In addition, the combined carrier (ore/bulk/oil)
fleet consisted of 975 T-2s of which about 50 percent reportedly were in oil
service, giving a total of about 9,840 T-2s available for transporting oil. The
tanker market was tight; customary summer downturns in charter rates did not
occur in 1970. Most observers of the oil industry agree that the tankerage avail-
able for charter was in the neighborhood of 2 percent of the total fleet. A
5 percent availability is regarded by oil industry watchers as providing sufficient
spare for a “comfortable” market—i.e., charter rates are reasonable in an oil

 

company’s view and too low in an independent shipowner’s view. High and
rising charter rates through the third quarter of 1970—teflecting the TAPLINE
shutdown and Libyan cutbacks—confirm judgments that the market remains
tight.

15. Assuming that only about 2 percent of the 9,840 T-2 fleet was available
for spot charter, about 10,140 T-2s (a 3 percent increase in the fleet) would
have provided the 5 percent “comfortable” spare capacity. Table II takes this
as the base figure, representing the T-2s needed to move oil in mid-1970, and
calculates the requirements for the years 1971 through 1975 at 6, 7, and 8 per-
cent growth in total oil demand. These calculations assume that the SCREPROVESFOR RELEASE
distribution of sources of supply, regions of consumption, and thefATiq0U:2000
relative importance of tanker-carried oil in world demand remain roughly as

oer ,
Page-12
they are today.’ Table III gives estimates of tankers available through 1973,
taking into account present tankerage, scheduled deliveries of new tankers, likely
slippage in construction schedules, and estimated losses due to scrapping and
accident. Firm figures on deliveries—and hence on the tanker fleet as a whole—
ave not available beyond the end of 1973. Most shipyard capacity, especially
that suitable for tankers of 200,000 DWT and over (more than 80 percent of
the tanker tonnage now on order is of this size), is booked solidly through 1972
and fairly heavily into 1973. The total orders for late 1973, 1974 and beyond—
some of which are already being placed—will reflect the demand oil companies
and charter operators expect in the second half of this decade. Although there
is unused capacity in US shipyards, the lead time for tanker construction in
these yards would preclude any significant additional deliveries in response to
new orders before the end of 1972. Further, the high costs would discourage
customers unless they expected extraordinarily high tanker rates for several
years ahead. (See Chart, page 9.)

16. There will be enough tanker capacity to move oil from producing countries
to consumers in the next year or so, assuming no change in the availability of
short haul oil. Even recognizing likely delays in tanker production, deliveries
through 1971 appear to be substantially in excess of the tonnage needed to cope
with even an 8 percent rate of growth in demand (see Table III). Although tanker
supply and demand will come into balance in the first half of 1971, assuming
the continued availability of 50 percent of combined carriers, this is a period
of peak tanker employment, which will probably make for extended stringency
in the tanker market, Deliveries of new tankers in 1971 should substantially
ease the tight market, with charter rates returning to more normal levels in
the second half of the year. By the end of 1971, even an § percent growth in
demand would require only 11,420 T-2s. This requirement would be met by a
fleet of 11,280 T-2s and only 10 percent (140 T-2s) of the combined carrier fleet

   
  

or the reasons indicated below, Dr. Ray S. Cline, the Director of Intelligence and Re-
search, Department of State, does not accept this Jast assumption, which implies that tanker-
carried oil and the demand for tanker capacity will grow at the same rate as consump-
tion. First, production not requiring tanker capacity for delivery satisfies a r part of
the consumption demand in the US and a minor part in Europe. From this, and the fact
that the rate of growth in consumption is higher in Japan and Europe where all or the
great bulk of consumption requirements is filled by tanker-carried oil, it follows that the
overall demand for tanker capacity will grow more rapidly than overall oil consumption.
Second, INR considers that the rate of growth of tanker-carried oil in US supplies assumed
in the overall average growth rates given here and in Table II is subject to a large margin
of error and that the share of the annual growth in US consumption that will have to be
carried by tanker will probably increase. Finally, higher overall average rates of growth
in tanker demand for the five year period would still understate the annual growth rates in
1971 and 1972 if, as evidence suggests, growth in the demand for oil declines over. the
1971-1975 period, since tanker demand growth rates would be higher than the averages in
the first half of that period and lower in the last half. Despite the foregoing, INR agrees
that deliveries of new tankers and combined carriers through 1971 are likely to be adequate

to cope with the growth in demand for oil, although not by the margin estimated pa }OVED FOR RELEASE
sraph 16 below, and that, barring a further restriction in the supply of short-haul oil, EDATE:NOV 2000

and Japan will get the oil they need.

8 aor
Page-13
in oil service which would provide a comfortable market with 5 percent spare
capacity available. By the end of 1972, only 8 percent of the combined carrier
fleet in oil service would be required to provide this spare.

17. Tanker deliveries appear likely to stay ahead of oil demand into 1974,
which is about as far ahead as we can forecast on this point. There appears to
be sufficient spare capacity to keep the market comfortable. Thus, even if
TAPLINE remains closed and Libyan production remains restricted, Europe
and Japan will get the oil they need. Sections III-IV below discuss the factors
bearing on an interruption, Section V the likelihood, and the Annex the conse-
quences of certain specific interruptions.

FREE WORLD TANKER FLEET
Estimated Availability and Demand*

(T-2 Equivalents)
16,000

 

Oil Tankers plus 100% of “]
Combined Carriers

Oil Tankers plus 50% of 7%
Combined Carriers

14,000

12,000

   

oS it tankers

10,000
mn Tanker availability
———— Tanker demand at

growth rates shown

8,000
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975

 

“Based on growth in Free World oil demand at average annual rates shown.
510100 10-70

lll. THE USSR AND MIDDLE EAST OIL
A. The Growth in Soviet Political Influence

18. The Soviet Union has firmly established itself as a major power in the
Middle East. Although this area is not one where its most vital nationd{PRROVEBIROR RELEASE
are involved—Eastern and Central Europe and Communist China DATE: W0¥.2000
important—Moscow views its expanded preserve in the Arab world as a partial

oan 9
Page-14
fulfillment of a long-sought goal to replace Western influence in contiguous :
countries and in the Mediterranean. The Arab-Israeli conflict, accompanied
by increasing radicalism in the Arab states, has furthered Soviet leverage, and

the USSR has had considerable success in exploiting other opportunities in
the area.

19. The Soviets are probably optimistic about their ability to maintain and i
expand their influence in the Middle East over the long term. Radicalism is F
likely to grow in the Arab states whether there be an accommodation between é
the Arabs and Israelis or another round of war—and radicalism has tended to E
favor the Soviets at the expense of traditional Western interests. Middle Eastern
radicalism typically blends strident anti-Western sentiment, nationalism, and
pressure for social and economic reform into importunities for change in the
status quo. It is likely in the years ahead to offer Moscow additional opportunities
for expanding the Soviet role in various aspects of Middle Eastern life. The
USSR, whose policy is aimed at increasing its influence in Algeria, Egypt, Syria,
and Iraq, has established closer relationships with and has supplied arms to
the new regimes in the Sudan and Southern Yemen, and more recently to Libya.
Soviet prestige is also growing to some extent in such moderate countries as
Lebanon, Jordan, Tunisia, and Kuwait, largely as a by-product of Soviet support
for the Arabs against Israel and the US.

B. The Soviet Role in Oil

20. The continued expansion of Soviet influence in the Middle East has not
been accompanied by an equivalent expansion of the limited role which the
Soviets now play in the Middle Eastern oil matters. Moscow would almost cer-
tainly like to have a greater role for both economic and political reasons, but
there are compelling practical considerations in the way. These include the
essentially nationalistic attitudes of most Middle Eastern countries toward their
mineral wealth, the difficulty of marketing vast quantities of oil, inadequacies
in Soviet technology and equipment, and especially small tanker capacity. We
indicate below certain constraints on Soviet activities over the next five years,
along with developments which we consider fairly likely and which could affect
the Soviet role.

21. The USSR is self-sufficient in oil and will remain so at least through
1975 and probably through 1980. Moreover, it will continue to export increasing
quantities of oil from its own resources to Eastern Europe and will remain the
major source of oil for this area. The level of Soviet exports both to Eastern
Europe and to non-Communist countries will depend to a growing degree, how-
ever, on Soviet ability to procure supplemental supplies of oil from the Middle
East for re-export. This will be especially true after 1975.

22. At present the USSR supplies the Communist countries of Eastern Europe
with approximately 800,000 bpd, about 85 percent of the oil required by thqggproyen FOR RELEASE
countries—exclusive of Romania which is itself a net exporter of petroleujpTe: Now 2000
products. The USSR also exports another 800,000 bpd to other countries, nearly

10 a
Page-15
700,000 of this to Western Europe. For many years Soviet exports of oil have
helped to tie the economies of Eastern Europe to the USSR and exports to
Western Europe have provided the Soviet Union with its most important source
of convertible currency.

23, The USSR’s rapidly growing domestic and export requirements for oil
are becoming more costly and technically more difficult to satisfy. Soviet oil
fields are being depleted more rapidly than expected, in part because poor ex-
tractive practices have made large quantities of reserves impossible to recover.
More and more Soviet oil is coming from recently discovered deposits in Central
Asia and Western Siberia, far from centers of consumption in the western part
of the USSR. Extremes of climate, difficult terrain, reluctance of skilled specialists
to work under such conditions, and shortage of suitable technology and equip-
ment make exploitation of these reserves difficult and costly, and the rate of
increase in total production of oil is slowing down.*

24, The USSR plans to produce about 9 million bpd in 1975 and will probably
achieve this goal. This amount would be adequate to provide for all domestic
needs, to satisfy most East European demand for oil, and to permit export of
substantial quantities of oil to other Communist countries and elsewhere in the
world. To facilitate deliveries to Eastern Europe, the Friendship Crude Oil Pipe-
line System from the Urals-Volga to Eastern Europe is being paralleled and
when completed in the mid-1970s should be capable of transporting some 1 million
bpd. If the USSR wishes to maintain exports to other areas at about present
levels, modest quantities of oil, perhaps 200,000 bpd, may have to be procured
from external sources. The USSR has already entered into agreements with
several Middle Eastern countries—Iraq, Syria, Egypt, and Algeria—that could
provide approximately this quantity of oil in 1975 in return for Soviet assistance
in developing petroleum resources. Moreover, the USSR has also encouraged
East European countries to seek supplemental supplies elsewhere in exchange
for technical equipment and manufactured goods. By 1975 Eastern Europe prob-
ably will be importing small quantities of oil, perhaps 300,000 bpd, in addition
to that from Russia. About one-third of this oil will be imported by Romania.

25. In 1980, Soviet production of oil probably will amount to about 10 million
bpd as against a planned target of 11-12 million bpd. Although the USSR is
capable of achieving the lower end of this target, we do not believe it will make
the costly investment in technology, equipment, and oil exploration needed to
do so. Its probable output of 10 million bpd would be more than adequate to
cover domestic demand, but the amount available for export would be sharply
reduced. By 1980, if the USSR wishes to provide most of the oil required by
Eastern Europe and to maintain exports to other Communist countries and to
the rest of its markets at or near present levels, it would have to procure sizable

"Drilling has become a significant obstacle to oil and gas development in, the U:

Soviet drilling equipment is ill-suited to the requirements of the Siberian sc ARPROVERROR RELEASE
USSR is not doing sufficient drilling annually to sustain an adequate ratio of pr(ATEWOW2000

to production.
a un
Page-16
amounts of oil, about 1.5 million bpd, from other sources, probably from Middle
East nations. Combined Soviet and East European procurement of oil from
the Middle East and North Africa by 1980 could total about 2.2 million bpd.
Although this is a significant amount of oil, it would represent only a small
share of Middle East and North African production.

26, It is by no means certain that the USSR could in fact procure this amount
of oil from the Middle East. The oil producing countries have traditionally wanted
hard currency for their oil. Some of them might find it necessary to provide oil
to the USSR in exchange for civilian goods or to pay for military equipment.
Such arrangements would improve Soviet export capabilities, but it is hard to
visualize the bulk of 2 million bpd being subject to barter arrangements. The
major oil producing countries are not so tied to the USSR—precisely because they
have not needed Soviet equipment on credit—as to feel compelled to participate
in such deals. The Soviets could act as brokers for sales of Middle East oil. This
arrangement would be profitable, but their hard currency earnings would be much
less than from exporting their own oil, and the Arabs probably would see but
slight economic advantage in having Soviet middlemen in place of Americans
or Europeans.

27. Nonetheless, the USSR will be increasingly interested over the next decade
in participating, through assistance to the national oil companies, in the develop-
ment of petroleum in the Middle East. Such participation could provide the
USSR with a market for goods and services not otherwise readily exportable.
However, oil plays too vital a role in the Soviet economy and military establish-
ment for the Kremlin to contemplate extensive dependence on external sources.
Oil acquired from the Near East will remain negligible for Soviet domestic re-
quirements through 1975, although, on the most liberal assumptions, it could
amount to about 60 percent of export availability in 1980.

28. We would not expect the Soviets to initiate any moves to deny Middle
Eastern oil to NATO or Japan even were they in a position to do so. Denial on a
small scale would serve as little more than an annoyance to the NATO allies,
would not disrupt essential industry, and would moveover be costly to Moscow
in terms of international good will. All NATO countries would view even
limited denial efforts as an act of economic warfare and the price to the Soviets
would be high in many respects. Such economic belligerency would be viewed
with dismay by all raw material producing states in the underdeveloped world
as a potential source of extreme disruption of the markets for their commodities.
Finally, Soviet commercial interests probably coincide with those of the Arabs
and of the oil consumers in dictating stability in international oil markets. Soviet
as well as Arab exporters benefit from open markets and high prices.

29. Denial on a large scale seems even more remote. Even in the unlikely
event that the Soviets acquired a major role as a broker for Middle Eastern oil,

Moscow would be forced to sell it for hard currency rather than hold it off t
~ ate ag . ye ; ifprnoven FOR RELEASE

TE: NOW 2000

market, The amounts involved are so huge, both in terms of the USSR’s go!
and convertible currency reserves and its ability to provide wanted goods to

12 nr
Page-17
the oil producers, that the Soviet Union would not be able to purchase a major
portion of Near East oil for its own account.’ Likewise, the Soviet Union would
be hard put to persuade most of Europe’s Middle East suppliers to withhold
their oil for any length of time since oil revenues are so important to their
economies and national goals. Middle Eastern oil becomes valuable only when
it is processed, transported, and marketed.

30. It has not been Moscow's practice, so far as we can ascertain, to urge
any of the Middle Eastern oil producing states to nationalize foreign-owned
oil concessions or to cut off exports. What the Soviets have made clear is their
willingness to assist state-owned oil companies. For example, Moscow has drill-
ing contracts with the Egyptian, Syrian, Algerian, and Iraqi national oil com-
panies, although it has become only peripherally involved in production or
marketing. Should one or another of the producing states seize foreign-owned
oil properties in the future, there is little doubt that, if asked, Moscow would
provide some aid. But for many years the heavy Soviet commitment to the
development of its domestic oil resources probably would limit the scope of
such aid,

31. The actual Soviet role in the Middle Eastern oil industry over the next
five years may take several forms. The USSR will probably continue to be
involved in exploration for oil and in production, as it is, e.g., in Iraq at present.
Moscow could become involved as well in the construction of pipelines—the
Soviets are building part of the Iranian-Soviet natural gas line and may build
an oil pipeline in Syria. Thus, it is possible in the long run for the Soviets to
gain an increasingly significant position in the oil industry in the Aral states.

IV. CHANGING PATTERNS OF OWNERSHIP AND PRODUCTION

32. Irrespective of Soviet oil policies, the next five to 10 years are going to
see growng pressures for change in the relationship between the Western pro-
ducing companies and the oil states. The host countries will grow more deter-
mined to control the production of their own oil, Middle East governments
will insist on some form of participation in all new concessions granted, with
the private oil companies often relegated to the role of minority partners with,
or service contractors producing oil for, these national companies. In some
cases, presently operating companies may be forced into alteration of their con-
cessionary status or may be replaced by other companies operating as con-
tractors. Or parts of their facilities (e.g. pipelines and terminals) may be
nationalized.

33. One type of participation in production and marketing is the joint ven-
ture, wherein the country with the oil resources forms a partnership with one
or more foreign oil companies to exploit some part of the country’s oil resources.

"Soviet gold holdings are estimated at $1.6 billion, palpably insufficient to ‘ WoW 2000
preclusive action. Their holdings of convertible currency are neyligible. Payment ATE: foreign,
oil companies to Middle Eastern governments in 1969 totalled nearly $5 billion.

oor 13
Page-18
so

One of the partners is a state agency, usually the national oil company, which
holds an equity interest in the concession; the other is the foreign oil company,
which owns the remaining interest, provides technical expertise, and often mar-
kets most of the oil produced. Algeria’s national oil company, SONATRACH,
for example, participates in a number of such joint ventures.

34. National oil companies are also increasingly turning to exclusive explora-
tion for and production of oil on their own. The expertise they may lack is
provided by expatriate technicians, drilling companies, and the like, hired on
contract. Lying somewhere between this “self-sufficient” national oil company
and the joint venture is the service contract, under which a foreign oil company
is hired to take complete charge of oil operations in a particular area of a host
country. The foreign company explores for and produces oil for the account
of the national company and in return is usually given the right to buy part
of the produced oil at an attractive price. The foreign company also usually
undertakes, if and when requested, to find buyers for at least part of the
national company’s share of the oil.

35. A new practice, still in the early stages of development, is that of direct
bilateral marketing contracts between national oil companies and consumer
countries.’ Over the next five years this type of arrangement will probably in-
crease markedly, in large part because national oil companies are growing in
the producing countries; such arrangements will represent but a small part of
world oil trade, however. Several national oil companies in the Arab states and
Iran deal directly with state-owned oil corporations. Examples of such bilateral
contract arrangements have been those between Iran and Romania, Saudi Arabia
and Romania, Libya and Austria, Kuwait and Spain, and Egypt and Commu-
nist China. Iraq has also made a similar arrangement with the Soviet Union,
in return for assistance in producing oil.

36. By the end of the 1970s, a substantial portion of Middle East oil produc-
tion could be under the control of host governments—through joint ventures,
service contracts, independent operations, and, possibly, partial or complete
nationalization of present concessions. While nationalization of Middle Eastcrn
oil does not necessarily imply denial of oil to Europe, Japan, or even the US,
it could bring about substantial changes in the role of the international oil
companies. The basic raison d’etre for these companies lies in their ability to
assure to consumers a smooth, continuing, and reliable flow of oil, They can
replace from another concession (or by purchase from other companies) the
production from any one country which might have been interrupted for tech-
nical or political reasons. They also own or have under charter most of the
Free World tanker capacity, and they own a large proportion of the refining,
transportation, storage, and distribution facilities of Western Europe. For these
reasons (and the cost of any alternatives), European countries have relied on
the companies for the bulk of their mushrooming fuel requirements. We be-

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
"In virtually all cases, the government of the consumer country is involved in the arranBATE: NOW 2000
ment to some degree.

14 oor
Page-19
ar

lieve that they will continue to do so unless the international companies are
unable to meet the need.

37. If nationalization should occur on such a scale that the companies could
not obtain sufficient oil from alternate sources and if the companies then refused
to deal with the holders of their former concessions, consumer country govern-
ments would feel compelled to step in, for example to arrange the terms of oil
purchase. The companies would almost certainly retain their roles as trans-
porters, refiners, and distributers of oil. Moreover, the desire to protect their
vital interests would impel consumers to seek multiple sources of supply to avoid
the potential hazards of relying on a single source. Producing countries would
look for multiple markets for analogous reasons.

V. CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH THE FLOW OF MIDDLE EAST OIL MIGHT
BE INTERRUPTED

A. General Considerations

38. For the most part, oil has flowed freely from the Middle East to markets
abroad since 1945. There was one instance of complete long-term shutdown of
a major oil producer. In 1951-1953, the Anglo-Iranian concessionary company
boycotted the nationalized Iranian oil industry so successfully that no Middle
Eastern host country has tried outright nationalization of an oil concession since.
There have been other interruptions, however. During the 1956 war between
Egypt and Britain, France, and Israel, the former blocked the Suez Canal and
the Syrians blew up the Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC) pipeline which extends
from Iraq to the Mediterranean. Both were out of use for about six months.
Syria closed the IPC line for three months in late 1966 and early 1967. The
1967 Arab-Israeli war caused the closure of the Canal, and certain producing
countries imposed a temporary selective embargo of oil shipments. TAPLINE
has been cut twice—once by sabotage and once by accident—in the past two
years. Libya imposed production cutbacks in 1970.

39. Of these interruptions, several took place in the context of the Arab-Israeli
dispute. But even in 1956 and 1967, the Egyptians blocked the Suez Canal
not so much to interrupt oil flow as to prevent the forces invading their country
from using it. So also the Syrians closed the pipeline in 1956 with a view to
harming Iraq as well as to hurting UK oil interests. Several other interruptions
of oil by Arabs were not connected with the Israeli issue, e.g., Syria’s closing of
pipelines in 1967 and 1970 and the Libyan production cutbacks.

40. This record suggests that the host countries, irrespective of their political
ideology, have been motivated primarily by a desire for increased revenue and,
hence, increased oil production. Of the radical regimes which have appeared in
the Arab world since 1950, none has chosen to risk the loss of major oil revenue
by using oil for political purposes in disputes with Western countries. A@PROWEB FOR RELEASE
seizure of the non-producing portions of the concession area of theDAPENOY 2000
1960 may have been an exception. This action did not interrupt production or

a 15
Page-20
ar

revenue, but it effectively retarded the growth of Iraqi oil exports and revenues
for several years. By and large, the record shows clearly that it is circumstances
of rapid change and high emotion—for example, the 1956 and 1967 Arab-Israeli
wars—which are likely to produce impetuous action by host countries against
Western oil interests.

41. Oil producing countries have been willing to collaborate, for example
in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), in bringing pres-
sures to raise per barrel oil revenues generally. Consistently, however, individual
countries have been willing, in fact anxious, to take advantage of one another's
difficulty in order to gain more total revenue by expanding output. (Kuwaiti
and Saudi Arabian production grew rapidly while Iranian production was shut
down in 1951-1953. Iran and other Gulf states have been eager to make up
Libyan cutbacks in 1970.) Among the Arab states, the rhetoric of Arab solidarity
masks the same low level of real cooperation in the oil sphere as it does in mili-
tary or political matters. Finally, the record shows that the quest for revenues
has often led the host countries and the producing companies to the verge of
a total rupture in relations over financial negotiations; in the end, however,
mutual dependence and financial self-interest have consistently prevented a
complete break.

42. Many of these trends continue; the need for revenue and profits is the
principal one. Each producing country has been aware that each of the large
oil companies could replace its oil by expanding production elsewhere. This
acts as a constraint on even radical regimes. States with conservative political
regimes and with close political ties to Europe or the US—e.g,, Iran and Saudi
Arabia—are even more reluctant to interrupt oil supplies than are the radical
states.

43, The Middle Eastern countries could hold Europe hostage if they could
agree to suspend all oil shipments until their demands were met. In theory
they could get enormously increased prices for their oil by so doing, but in
practice they simply do not trust each other sufficiently to be able to form such
a solid front. Indeed, we see little likelihood that cooperation among the various
oil producing countries would ever get to the point where even two or three
major oil producing countries collaborated in this fashion, although more limited
cooperation seems likely to continue.

B. Special Cases

44. It is possible, however, that a major oil producing state could come to
be ruled by a regime which was willing to cutoff oil production in order to
gain its own ends, The case of Libya has illustrated this point during 1970.
Libya’s strongly nationalistic leadership forced the oil companies operating in
the country to agree to a sharp increase in posted prices and tax rates, and
hence in payments to the government. This was brought about by unilateral

cuts in the companies’ production of crude oil and threats to seize their ARPROVED FOR RELEASE
cessions unless the government’s demands were met. With a strong foreAARE: NOW 2000

16 aor
Page-21
———

exchange reserve position adequate to last for a lengthy period, even if Libyan
oil revenues were restricted or stopped, the Libyans were in a very favorable
position to carry out this pressure tactic, since Libyan oil is close to European
consumers and is highly desirable because of its low sulfur content. These factors,
combined with a tight tanker situation, gave the companies little choice other
than to agree to Libyan terms.

45. The Libyan situation could be repeated elsewhere, although it would
seem that few oil producing states, radical or conservative, could find them-
selves in such a fortuitous combination of circumstances as the Libyans in 1970—
being located close to the market, possessing a premium type of oil, having very
large foreign exchange reserves, and being able to curtail or suspend production
at a time when transportation problems put the international oil industry in a
delicate situation. Similar action in the distant Persian Gulf area, for instance,
probably would have less impact. But a combination of circumstances might
bring another such act by some other highly nationalistic regime—possibly even
by the Libyans again or by the Algerians,

C. The Arab-Israeli Issue

46. Three years of violent peace since Israel defeated its Arab neighbors in
1967 have left their mark on the oil situation in the Arab countries. The close
association of the US with Israel, the existence of numerous armed guerrilla
organizations, and the stcadily increasing dependence of Europe on Middle
Eastern oil have provided greater incentive to the Arabs to interrupt oil supply
for political motives. We discuss in the next few paragraphs the types of develop-
ments in the Arab-Israeli situation which, in the light of these changes, could
impede the flow of oil to NATO countries and/or Japan.

 

 

47. As long as Isracl and its Arab neighbors remain at military loggerheads,
there is considerable potential for interruption of oil flow by Arab actions. The
likelihood of interruption would increase sharply in the event of a sudden de-
terioration in the situation, e.g., a new outbreak of major fighting. The magni-
tude and duration of any interruption would be influenced by the scale and
nature of the fighting and by the degree of involvement (real or imagined) of
the US and of particular NATO countries. The US and the UK are the most
likely targets.

48. Some of the moves which Arab oil producing countries are likely to make

in such circumstances would be more symbolic than real. Few Arab regimes

would be willing, or indeed able, to go to the lengths of a total embargo of oil.

Most of them need oil revenues to run the day-to-day operations of their govern-

ments. Saudi Arabia, for example, has already budgeted virtually all its antici-

pated annual oil income. The Algerians badly need large quantities of money to

finance an ambitious development plan; oil revenues would not even cover three-

fourths of their needs. Other Arab governments have similar desires. Of al ly PPHOVED FOR RELEASE
whose special case is discussed above, can most easily afford to let politiDATE¢#0V 2000
siderations rule over economic ones.

a
Page-22
49. Arab oil producing countries would probably try to prevent their oil from
reaching certain Western countries. But a selective embargo of oil is hard to
enforce and would be ineffective. Once oil leaves the terminal in a producing
country, the country has virtually no control over it. It can go to a distribution
point and thence reach an embargoed country. An embargo on shipments to
the US would be easier to enforce. Since most Arab oil reaching the US is shipped
directly to East Coast ports, non-compliance with an embargo would be harder
to conceal. Because the US now gets only 2.5 percent of its oil supplies from Arab
states, an embargo in these circumstances would impose few strains on US do-
mestic consumption. However, liftings of oil for US military forces could be
affected and, although the quantities involved are relatively small, replacing
them would involve some logistic complications.

“AA eRteeteenme

50. Circumstances could develop, moreover, in which one or more Arab oil
producing countries might move against US-owned oil producing companies.
Participation of US military units with Israel in fighting with the Arabs, for
example, would probably occasion seizure of most producing companies. Such
devices as partial or complete nationalization, or a prohibition against repatria-
tion of profits could hurt the US badly. (US oil operations in the Middle East
brought some $2 billion net inflow to the US balance of payments in 1969.)
Similar moves are possible against British companies (whose contributions to
the UK’s balance of payments is considerably greater than in the case of the US)
and are conceivable against other European countries; but most of the latter
are unlikely targets in the context of Arab-Israeli hostilities.

51. Should one or more Arab states seize all US (and/or UK) oil operations,
there would be serious disruptions in oil shipments, which could last for months.
However, consumers must have the oil and—except for Libya—the producing
countries must sell it fairly promptly in order to finance their economics. We
believe that, in the event a country seized a company or companies which pro-
duced substantial quantities of oil not replaceable from other sources, affected
NATO countries would find themselves compelled fairly speedily to make other
arrangements to obtain the oil they need. We believe that, in most cases of dis-
ruption, a near normal flow of oil would be restored before many months had
passed.

52. The Arab-Israeli situation has potential for yet another means of inter-
rupting oil flow, i.e., sabotage by the Palestinian guerrillas. There have been a
few minor instances of this sort already, and US and UK oil companies are
likely to be targets of sabotage in the years ahead. Oil fields, storage tanks, load-
ing facilities, tankers, and the like are vulnerable in varying degrees. It is rela-
tively simple to blow up a pipeline or a wellhead, but these are also relatively
easy to repair. Although repeated acts could be costly to the company involved,
this type of sabotage is not likely to interfere more than marginally with oil ship-
ments major shutdown ofa company’s operations would require sophistiqnsdoven FOR RELEASE
lemolition of key units, e.g., destroying a large part of a tank farm, rend qiPe Nov 2000
a loading pier unusable for an extended period, or knocking out an electric
Page-23
ao

power plant. The oil companies and the host countries would, of course, guard
against such actions, but they would be unable to protect against all contingencies.

 

53. In the sabotage operations they have tried so far within Israel and Israeli-
occupied territory, the Palestinian guerrillas have struck at targets of opportunity
rather than at targets of importance. We believe that, generally speaking, they
would do the same if they turned more of their attentions to oil installations,
especially as oil companies and local governments are taking steps to guard
~ critical installations. To inflict damage heavy enough to interrupt a significant

portion of oil flow would require a high level of competence in sabotage opera-
tions. We cannot judge the actual competence the fedayeen have or are likely
to acquire. It should be noted, however, that many Palestinians work in Middle
East oil companies, and they are a potential source of technical information for
the fedayeen and of access to oil installations. Finally, while we judge it un-
likely that any Arab country would destroy its own oil industry or sabotage
another's, the fedayeen do not have this inhibition.

D. Interstate Political Rivalry
54. The desire to put pressure on Iraq for political reasons has figured in
Syria’s two closures of the IPC pipeline in 1956 and 1966-1967. This desire could
cause Syria to close this line again. The two countries are ruled today by mutually
antagonistic Baath Parties, and antipathy between Baghdad and Damascus has
continued under a variety of regimes. Should the Syrians come to believe that,
| for example, Iraq was trying to overthrow their government, Damascus would
| probably retaliate. Since strong Syrian-Iraqi antagonism is likely to endure, we
rate closing of the IPC line—for at least a period of months—as likely sometime
in the next five years.

E. In Sum

55. We believe that, on the whole, oil producing countries will continue to
put their own financial needs ahead of ideology and politics and that they will
not attempt to deny, for more than a short period, significant quantities of oil
to Europe or Japan on political grounds. There are other forces in the area,
however, not under the constraints that affect the oil producing countries. The
possibilities for interruption are so many, the political emotions so prominent,
and the resentment against US policies—already strong and deep in many Arab
states—so likely to grow over the years ahead, that partial interruptions of oil
flow to NATO and to the US will probably occur during the next five years.
Short of major Arab-Israeli fighting, such interruptions are likely to be temporary
and to involve relatively small fractions of European supply; they might be
varied in cause, as well as effect. Among the possibilities are a Syrian closure
i“ the me pipeline and fedayeen sabotage of oil facilities. In the eveng, Bh YOR RELEASE

rab-Israeli fighting, some interruption of oil shipments seems almoghrgqih¥¥o00
and we would not rule out seizure of US oil interests.

sr 9
Page-24
APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: NOW 2000
Page-25
CONSEQUENCES OF CERTAIN INTERRUPTIONS IN OIL FLOW

1. We discuss in this annex the consequences of the disruption of oil flow in
the following circumstances: (a) Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC) pipeline shut
down, (b) Libyan and Iraqi production stopped completely, (c) production from
all Arab states stopped. The discussion assumes a seven percent average annual
growth in aggregate world demand; it assumes that the Suez Canal remains
closed and that TAPLINE does not teopen, it also assumes that a substantial part
of the combined carrier fleet would be available for oil service. The specific
details are those as of the second half of 1970, but we have tried to give as
much precision as we could to the consequences of interruptions over the
period to 1975. Generally speaking, the consequences of the interruptions posited
in Cases I and II would be most severe if they occurred within the coming
12 months. Beginning in the second half of 1971, there will be more spare
tanker capacity, in the event of an interruption in oil flow from some producers.
However, the magnitudes of oil involved would be progressively greater as the
years pass, and the dependence of certain European countries on particular oil
producing countries might vary by a few percentage points; Iraqi oil produc-
tion, and perhaps Libyan as well, is likely to grow below the average. None-
theless, the overall patterns will remain.

A. Case |: The Iraq Petroleum Company Pipeline Closed

2. The IPC pipeline system currently delivers about one million barrels per day
(bpd) of oil to terminals at the eastem Mediterranean, About 120 T-2s move this
volume of oil to southem Europe. There is sufficient oil available from other
sources to make up for this loss. However, if the loss was to be made up from
Persian Gulf sources, about 720 T-2s would be required for this movement. If the
event should occur in the next few months there would be insufficient transport
capacity to mect the additional tanker demand (600 T-2s), even if 100 percent
of the combined carrier fleet were put in oil service. By the end of 1971 the
contingency could be met, if the tanker fleet were augmented by 50 percent
of the combined carrier fleet.

  

 

B. Case Il: Interruption of All Libyan and Irogi Oil

3. Simultaneous interruption of all Libyan and Iraqi oil flow would take
45 million bpd off the market. All but .5 million of this is short-haul crude
available at Mediterranean terminals. About 700 T-2s presently suffice to haul
this oil from Mediterranean terminals to Europe, but some 2,900 T-2s would
be needed to haul replacement oil from the Persian Gulf. The difference of
2,200 T-2s is far beyond the limited spare tankerage forecast for any time in
the next five years. In fact, however, spare capacity in the Gulf is only about
3 million bpd, and even this would require about 1,500 T-2s, in addition to the

700 T-2s released from short-haul service. Although some replacement ofPRROMED FOR RELEASE

probably come from sources closer to Europe, more tankers would beDATEMQY 2000
than would be available. Hence, there would be oil shortages. On an average,

Pm

23
Page-26
the non-Communist world would be short of its needs by 8 percent for the
first few months, until the tankers released from Libyan and Iraqi service could
be rerouted to other longer haul sources. Western Europe would bear the brunt,
since it is the destination of most Libyan and Iraqi oil.

4, The overall shortage of oil supply would persist well beyond three months.
The shortage would require a reduction in oil consumption of about five per-
cent world-wide. However, if cutbacks were not made so as to provide an
equitable share of available supplies to all consumer countries, and Western
Europe and Japan were compelled to bear the total effects of the loss of Libyan
and Iraqi oil, reduction in consumption in these areas might have to go as
high as 15 percent for several months.

5. After six months of continued denial of Libyan and Iraqi oil, supplies from
other producing sources could be increased sufficiently to bring world-wide
supply and demand essentially into balance. There would, however, continue
to be a shortage of tankers to haul the oil. The reduction in deliveries of oil i
would force Western Europe to reduce consumption by about seven percent
(or to draw down stocks by the same amount), assuming that the US did not
reduce its own consumption and continued to use oil at presently estimated rates.

 

C. Case Ill: Total Denial of All Arab Oil

6. The denial of 14.5 million bpd for more than several weeks would be cata-
strophic. The oil shortage would amount to about 40 percent of production in the
non-Communist world. Europe and Japan would have to ration oi] consumption
drastically. Their respective industries would suffer severely, and the economic
consequences of reduced output on a massive scale beggar the imagination. In
the short term, little if any improvement in the situation could be expected.
After six months or so, forced draft production increases from non-Arab oil
sources and reduction of consumption in the US could ease the situation some-
what. Total oil production in the non-Communist world would probably he off
by 30-35 rather than 40 percent. Drastic oil shortages, ranging from 45 percent
of consumption in Europe to 55 percent of consumption in Japan, would persist.

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: NOW 2000

24
Page-27
TABLE I

OIL CONSUMPTION IN THE NON-COMMUNIST WORLD:
FORECAST FOR 1970 AND 1975*

THousaND Barres Per Day
1970 1975
AREA AvERAGE ANNUAL GrowTH Rate!

Gpercent 7percent 8 percent

Free World Total 40,105 53,670 56,250 58,930
Western Europe 12,400 17,300 18,200 19,000

NATO 10,500 14,700 15,400 16,100

Other 1,900 2,600 2,800 2,900
Japan 3,800 7,000 7,300 7,700
US 14,600 17,200 18,000 18,900
Other 9,400 12,200 12,800 13,300

 

* Because of rounding, components may not add to the totals shown.

’ These growth rates are forecast for total uon-Communist consumption; growth rates vary
for individual areas and the volumes shown under each forecast reflect the shares that each
area is ex] 1 to represent of total consumption in 1975.

  

  

TABLE IL

TANKER DEMAND IN THE NON-COMMUNIST WORLD, ASSUMING
AN AVERAGE GROWTH AND CONSUMPTION
1970-1975 *
(In T-2 Equivalents )

AVERAGE ANNUAL GrowTH RatTE

6percent Tpercent 8 percent
i Mid-1970 : 10,140 10,140 10,140

End of 1970 10,570 10,570 10,570

1971 11,200 11,310 11,420

~ 1972 : 11,880 12,100 12,330
1973 12,590 12,950 13,320

1974 13,340 13,860 14,380

1975 14,140 14,820 15,530

 

* All data are rounded to the nearest tens.
"Tanker demand based on average annual rates of growth in oil demand in nong Sp RaWED YOR RELEASE

world. DATE: NOW 2000

25
Page-28
sar

i
i

TABLE IIL

ESTIMATED GROWTH—FREE WORLD TANKER FLEET
1969-1973 *
(In T-2 Equivalents )

 

 

ComBINED

Dare On TANKERS CARRIERS
1969 As of 31 December 8,801 824
1970 To 30 June —Deliveries ¥ 594 151
Losses * . (44) _
As of 30 June 9,354 975
To 31 December —Deliveries» 730 100
Losses ¢ (50) —
As of 31 December 10,030 1,080
1971 —Deliveries ” 1,350 350
Losses * (100) —
As of 31 December 11,280 1,430
1972 —Deliveries " 1,0004 390
Losses ¢ (100) _
As of 31 December 12,180 1,820
1973 —Deliveries 840 320
Losses ¢ (100) _—
As of 31 December 12,920 2,140

 

"Based on data from World Tanker Fleet Review, 30 June 1970. Includes tankers of 10,000
DWT and over. Does not include 375 T-2s, about 4 percent of the total world tanker fleet, under
control of Communist countries. Figures after 30 June 1970 are rounded to the nearest 10.

” Deliveries after 30 June 1970 are estimates of probable deliveries, reflecting the cumulative
effects of slippage of 20 percent in delivery schedules. Vessels representing slippage in one
period were added to scheduled deliveries in the following period and the total was reduced
by 20 percent to derive probable deliveries for the later period.

* Losses—scrapping and accident—are arbitrary, being somewhat lower than for the 12
months ending 30 June 1970.

“The lower deliveries listed for 1972 and 1973, as compared to 1971, are accounted for by
obligations of shipyards for other types of vessels.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE: NOW 2000

26 er
Page-29
“pdq uorpur of pune
oq Aeur OLGT UL YORI ‘spmby_ ses [enyeU opnpour you sop uoNONporg “UMOYS s[O) a4) OF PpL lou ALUE syotodUOD ‘Ruspunor jo ostiioag .
BOL FR 6'e1 685 O6T'L GOL O0E'L HAWUNOD, TIS
ue out 'T ee OLFT oroydstua |] Worse yy ous Be
cog ‘eg wy O0L'e . I =
8% 08ST co npg Ai
91% 0096 sums po &
o-9e 000‘9T voor ogoqdsruayy 1707804,
rE O901T —— agoqdsraoyT WaOysKE OIC
I oes . “os. arsouopuy
“MOBI
1d sq
co nuoSTy
s q cesar
sor 008'F vote YY YON
a0 Lz JSUT, OTPPHY 2s10,
‘ oce ve “urge
80 ogg sarang,
BT co rqegcy nqy
: eet oe re cos bray
ores 99 a) “camany
g0a'% beh ws . Wquay ipneg
090'1 £06'T os glee FS cs uray 2)
gea'g OFE'S F 6% eee al 10g ISNT OPPHY
coe 9 COT oor SEL '6L we 000'1z oxoydsruoyy wioqsegy
6OT we 18 $69‘ LT £28 080 ‘Ge 6°28 oes FE Tes OOOTLE re PHO A 004
1 wh O°00T =~ Og Tz O°00T = ear 0g O00T —-OZ0'zF O0OT = DOERR s-uonanporg TO PHOAL :
WoL wnuuy ey Ae weg = mo Seto MO, Ae ang, nog ku
ofuoay yo sjorieg. jo spang yo Spang, yo
WwH_ puvsnoyy, yg puvsnoyy, yoo puvsuoyy, ruodieg — punsvow,
0961 0961 961 961 (vn
OL61 38VaND JSUT NO dasya
“NT UNGOUad SLVU TVYANNY) OL6T

 

GUVAA CALOTTIS) 0261-0961

* NOLLONUOUd TO TANYNO G'TIOM

AT ATE
Page-30
WORLD CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION, 1969

European NATO 0.5%

     

%,
WY

United States
21.9%

 
  
    
  
 
 

  

Middle East

29.4%

 

 
     
  

Other Western
Hemisphere
12.8%

    
 

Communist
Countries

17.1%

 

North Africa
10.3%

   

  
   

WORLD OIL CONSUMPTION, 1969

NATO 59 oy
%

 
   

 

 
  

European NATO
22.6%

   

United States
32.3%

  
 
 
 
 
     
 

Other
Western Europe

Other Free World
15.6%

Canada

Ne gem

 
 

Communist
Countries

14.5%

   
 

78828 8-70

Because of rounding, percentages may not add to 100%
Page-31
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of Persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis, Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the follow.

ing officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

¢. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army :

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

@. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force :

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

9. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency ‘

|. Director of Central Reference Service, CIA, for any other Department or.
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Central Reference Service, CIA.

 

 
    
 
 
   

3. When this document is disseminated Overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a Period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding’ agency, or per.
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953,

4. The title of this document when used Separately from the text should be clas-
sified: FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

= DISTRIBUTION: APPROVED FO RELEASE

White House ives
National Security Council DATE; NOW-20

"Department of State
Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
