
Page-1
156

COPY NO.
SECRET

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE COUNCIL OF
ECONOMIC MUTUAL ASSISTANCE:

   
 
  

Document Wo.
NNO CHANG: *

Np ‘
Aaths\ DoW NS
a Dats
G7
3

   

   

 

ORE 50-49
Published 19 April 194y2etnent Ho, b0/
ee
. ¢
42)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
SECRET
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this Publication is for the information and use of the recipient
ignated on the front cover and of individuals under the Jurisdiction of the recipient's

performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by

y the following:
a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army
ec. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CLA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board
Page-3
ORE 50-49 SECRET

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC MUTUAL ASSISTANCE

SUMMARY

The formation of the Council of Economic Mutual Assistance (CEMA) represents
a further step toward the ultimate integration of the satellite economies by the Soviet
Union. Under a facade of “equality” between the members, necessitated by the strong
nationalism of the individual Eastern European countries, the Kremlin will utilize
the Council to coordinate economic plans for the entire Orbit to conform to the require-
ments of the Soviet Union. Future industrialization in the satellites will undoubtedly
no longer be based on national lines, but on considerations of Soviet strategy and
location of natural resources. As satellite economies become increasingly specialized,
individual economic dependence on the Soviet Union will tend to increase, economic
boundaries will become blurred, and the ability of any satellite to free itself from the
Kremlin influence will diminish still further.

Supplementing its goal of coordinating orbit-wide industrial planning through
the Council, the Kremlin will probably use the organization to establish closer super-
vision over orbit trade by means of a “ruble clearing system.” Meanwhile Com-
munist propaganda, in order to counter the growing economic stabilization of West-
ern Europe and to placate satellite nationalism, will portray the Council to the satellite
peoples as an organization to provide a means of raising their low standard of living
through “mutual cooperation.”

The Council is likely to constitute an increasingly useful instrument for the
extension and coordination of Soviet economic control over the satellite nations.

Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air Force
have concurred in this report. It is based on information available to CIA as of 28
March 1949.

1 SBeRET

 

 

|
|
|
|
Page-4
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC MUTUAL ASSISTANCE

1. Composrrion anp Aims.

On 25 January 1949 Moscow announced the formation of the Council of Economic
Mutual Assistance. Original members were the USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Ru-
mania, Hungary, and Bulgaria, with Albania admitted later. Its announced aims
are: (1) the exchange of experience in the economic field; (2) the rendering of mutual
technical assistance; and (3) the rendering of reciprocal assistance in regard to raw
materials, foodstuffs, machinery, and equipment. It will meet periodically, in the
capitals of the signatory countries, in turn, under the chairmanship of the representa-
tive of the host nation. According to the public announcement the Council will make
its decisions only with the consent of the country concerned. Membership is open
to other European countries which subscribe to the principles of the organization, and
have the desire to participate in broad economic cooperation with the member nations.

According to a reported secret protocol of the agreement forming the CEMA, it
will act to supervise the consolidation and development of the industries and
natural resources in the member countries so that they will no longer be competitive.
Member countries are required to submit to the Council detailed monthly reports on
their economies. By 1950 all economic planning in the Orbit is to come under the
direct supervision of the Council. A permanent Secretariat General will be located
in Moscow to serve as the Executive Body. This Secretariat, under strict Kremlin
direction, will assume complete authority over all CEMA activities. Furthermore, the
decisions of the Council are, according to the same report, to be binding on the individ-
ual members, and the organization has the right to send inspectors to ascertain
compliance with its directives.

2. NEEp For Sovier Economic Action 1n Eastern Europe.

The formation of the CEMA represents a further move toward implementing
Soviet long-range plans for the complete economic integration of Eastern Europe.
The growing stability of Western Europe under the Marshall Plan and the concurrent
difficulties of the satellite economies have forced the Kremlin to take action to preserve
the important segment of Soviet economic potential represented by the Satellites.
The USSR, in 1947, prevented its puppets from joining the European Recovery Pro-
gram but had little economic aid to offer as a substitute. Furthermore, the USSR was
probably none too anxious to.see rapid postwar economic stabilization in Eastern
Europe until Soviet control over the region had been assured. As a result, with their
economies wrecked by the war and further depleted by Soviet exploitation, the coun-
tries of Eastern Europe have, from the Moscow viewpoint, reached a point of diminish-
ing economic returns. Now, with effective opposition submerged or destroyed, the

2 SEORET
Page-5
SECRET

USSR can attempt to revitalize the economy of the region to serve its own ends, and
in its own fashion. In the early stages of this program, the CEMA can serve a useful
purpose.

Many of the announced provisions of the plan have already been implemented, to
some extent, through the system of bilateral agreements previously entered into by
the various governments of the Soviet orbit. Under these agreements provision has
already been made for the extensive exchange of technical and economic assistance
and of raw materials, foodstuffs, machinery, and equipment. In addition, the Kremlin
exercises extensive control over satellite economies by such means as direction of trade
Policies, economic planning, and joint ownership of enterprises. The New Council,
however, will probably serve better to integrate the economic effort of the area, and to
insure that the exchanges more effectively contribute to long-range Moscow plans.
Moreover, under the facade of “mutuality” and “equality,” the future intensification
of this process can be accomplished and Soviet plans can be better concealed.

3. ADVANTAGES OF COORDINATED OrBIT INDUSTRIALIZATION.

Because of the nationalism prevalent in Eastern Europe, effective industrial coor-
dination has been absent, even under the postwar puppet Communist regimes. By
subordinating the individual satellite economies to Soviet direction, and by assuming
a more dominant role in making future plans, the Kremlin, acting through the
medium of the Council, will eventually bring about more effective industrial coordina-
tion and thus increase the Eastern European economic potential. With the current
shortage of industrial goods and skilled technicians in the Soviet orbit, coupled with the
announced Soviet determination to raise its economic potential beyond that of the
West in the shortest possible time, the desire for rationally planned industrialization
is understandable.

Moreover, the Soviet goal of orbit-wide industrial specialization will serve the
further purpose of rendering the individual satellites more economically dependent
on the USSR. Since plans for industrialization will be based primarily on considera-
tions of Soviet strategy and location of natural resources, instead of on national self-
sufficiency, the individual satellites will lose all semblance of economic independence.

4. Tue Counci as an INSTRUMENT FoR ESTABLISHING A “RUBLE CLEARING SysTEM.”

Formation of the CEMA could facilitate the USSR’s establishment of a “ruble
clearing system,” centrally controlling the foreign trade of the entire Soviet orbit.
Through its domination of the Council, the Kremlin would exercise this control with-
out needlessly intensifying the nationalistic resentment already existent throughout
the satellites. Such a system would be designed to: (1) establish a common pool
of foreign exchange and gold reserves permitting more efficient utilization of such
assets under Soviet direction; (2) provide for an improved accounting of balance of
payments among the orbit countries; (3) permit more effective Kremlin control over
the orbit’s foreign trade; and (4) enhance the prestige of the ruble by substituting it
for the dollar as a unit of accounting in the intra-satellite trade agreements. Evi-

3 SECRET
Page-6
.

dence of this last trend is already available in the 1949 Soviet trade agreements with
Poland and Rumania.

On the other hand, in spite of persistent rumors, it is considered improbable that
the USSR will attempt, in the immediate future, to use the Council as a vehicle for
the creation of an internationally acceptable ruble. It is extremely doubtful that the
Kremlin will permit the exposure of the ruble to the pressures and manipulations of
the international market, in view of the constant Soviet desire to maintain absolute
control over all phases of Soviet foreign trade.

5. Tue Counc. as a Prop To THE East GERMAN Economy.

Recent developments point to the possible future participation of the Soviet Zone
of Germany as a member of the Council. In order to counterbalance the effects of
the Western blockade and the relative improvement of economic conditions in the
Western zones, the Kremlin must bolster the sagging economy of eastern Germany.
Because of the general poverty of its economy and its economic commitments, the
USSR cannot provide effective economic assistance to this key area without substan-
tial contributions from neighboring Czechoslovakia and Poland, whose populations,
even among the Communists, still retain an inherent fear and distrust of the Ger-
mans. The inclusion of eastern Germany in the Council would help to overcome this
hostility, and would afford the Soviets increased opportunity to aid the ailing German
economy.

6. THe Councit’s Propacanpa VALUE.

Finally, while the material benefits to the USSR derived from the formation of
CEMA will not be apparent until its coordinating and planning functions take effect,
the organization provides the Kremlin with a potent propaganda weapon. Soviet
spokesmen are contending that the Council will afford higher living standards to the
satellite peoples. They depict the Council as the “democratic” reply to the “impe-
trialist” ERP.

7. EVALUATION OF THE COUNCIL’S ROLE.

As an instrument for tightening and coordinating the Kremlin’s economic control
over its Eastern European empire, the Council is likely to prove generally successful,
and its importance and effectiveness may be expected to increase in the future. The
Kremlin has in the Council an organization for more efficiently exploiting the eco-
nomic possibilities of the Orbit for ultimate Soviet advantage. In order to obtain
maximum benefits from the orbit economies, however, the USSR must provide cer-
tain raw materials and equipment which the satellites cannot obtain from other
sources. With the USSR unable to obtain from the West the industrial equipment
with which rapidly to expand its economic potential, it must utilize the highly
important satellite facilities to the utmost. The USSR, moreover, has already
attempted to obtain scarce materials from the West, through the satellites. For such
operations the Council should prove of great value to the Soviet Union.

4 SECRET
Page-7
U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFI

3648—STATE—1949