
Page-1
NATIONAL

BECREF

NUMBER 100~-3-56

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM 7
RELEASE IN FULL

Sheds

Submitted by the

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
Preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.

Concurred in by the
INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE

on 24 April 1956. Concurring were the Special Assistant,
Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of
Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director
of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF;
and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint Stag.
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the TAC,
and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
abstained, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

 

 

NIE 100-3-56
24 April 1956

INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

SINO-SOVIET POLICY AND ITS PROBABLE
EFFECTS IN UNDERDEVELOPED AREAS
Page-2
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient indicated on the front cover and of per-
sons under his jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination
may be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

a

eaeg

pio

Special Assistant to the Secretary for Intelligence, for the Department of
State

. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, for the Department of the Army
. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
|. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or

Agency

2, This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-
cable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
ment with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2, 22

 

June 1953.
SREP
nauthorized person is nit Ee Ps,
DISTRIBUTION:
White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense
Operations Coordinating Board
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-3
SINO-SOVIET POLICY AND ITS PROBABLE EFFECTS
IN UNDERDEVELOPED AREAS

THE PROBLEM

To define the nature of and probable developments in Sino-Soviet Bloc foreign
policy with particular respect to underdeveloped areas;' to estimate Bloc capabilities
to support a policy of expanding economic relations with these areas: and to esti-
mate the susceptibility of underdeveloped areas to these policies.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The new Sino-Soviet Bloc policy, which
has been pushed with increasing vigor
since the spring of 1955, marks the emer-
gence of the Bloc as a formidable com-
petitor with the West in the political,
economic, and cultural spheres for posi-
tion and influence among the underde-
veloped nations. The Bloc portrays it-
self as a defender of peace and as a
proponent of mutually beneficial rela-
tions with the outside world. (Paras. 11,
36)

2. A key element of the current Bloc poli-
cy has been an unprecedented effort to
establish a wide range of economic rela-
tions with underdeveloped countries.
The Bloc is exploiting two basic condi-
tions in the underdeveloped areas (a) the
large extent to which the economic live-
lihood of most underdeveloped nations
depends on the production and export of

‘As used herein, “underdeveloped” or “former
colonial areas” is intended to encompass South-
east Asia, South Asia, the Middle East, North
Africa, Tropical Africa, and Latin America.

raw materials and foodstuffs, and (b)
the desire of most governments of the un-
derdeveloped countries to accelerate eco-
nomic development while simultaneously
increasing welfare services and consump-
tion. (Para. 23)

3. Within the past year, there has been
a marked increase in Bloc trade with
these areas. The Bloc is offering capital
equipment and technical services in ex-
change for bulk purchases of raw materi-
als and foodstuffs. It also has offered
some low interest, medium and long term
credits to finance the export of capital
goods and arms. (Para. 26)

4. We are unable to estimate with preci-
sion the extent to which the Bloc will be
willing or able to expand its economic
dealings with the underdeveloped areas.
It has the capability to supply a wide
range of capital goods and know-how and
has reached a stage of economic develop-
ment in which the exchange of capital
goods for raw materials and foodstuffs

SER 1
Page-4
SEoRERI : 2

will tend to result in a net economic gain.
By 1960, it appears likely that total Bloc
trade (including arms) with the under-
developed countries will be around $2
billion annually (about double the 1955
figure). (Paras. 26-35)

5. If Bloc economic programs continue to
expand at the present rate and follow the
present general pattern of concentration,
they will alleviate some of the immediate
economic difficulties of a number of un-
derveloped nations, particularly Burma,
Afghanistan, Argentina, and Turkey.
Bloc trade and credit will probably not
facilitate a substantial degree of eco-
nomic development in any of the under-
developed countries with the possible ex-
ception of Burma and Afghanistan. A
number of underdeveloped countries, in
which a few activities constitute an im-
portant part of their economies, may de-
velop a degree of economic dependence
on the Bloc out of proportion to the per-
centage of their trade with the Bloc.
However, the total political effect of the
new Bloc policies toward underdeveloped
countries is not necessarily proportional
to the extent of economic relations with
these countries. (Paras. 41-42)

6. In general, Bloc tactics are already
having important political effects in the
Arab-Asian area. The image of the Bloc
as a principal proponent of peace and dis-
armament and as a benefactor of the
underdeveloped nations has become cred-
ible to many people in this area. Exist-
ing neutralist tendencies have been rein-
forced and several states now aligned
with the West have begun to weigh the
benefits of a more “independent” posture.
The availability of Bloc assistance has led
some nations to believe that they are now
in a stronger position to bargain with the

West for aid. The availability of Bloc aid
has contributed to the acerbation of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. US concern with
the Bloc threat in neutralist areas has
led to cries of neglect from Pakistan and
the Philippines. Several of the nations
aligned with the West have become suffi-
ciently impressed with Bloc protestations
of peace to become critical of US emphasis
on military aid and have called for in-
creased economic support. Bloc tactics
have also contributed to the mounting
pressures against the maintenance of
Western trade controls. (Para. 43)

l, If the Bloc continues its present tactics
over the next few years, present political
trends in the underdeveloped countries
are likely to be accentuated. In particu-
lar, the appeal of neutralism will proba-
bly grow in Asia and the commitments
of Thailand and the Baghdad Pact na-
tions to regional security arrangements
will probably be weakened. Issues divid-
ing the West and the Bloc will probably
be further blurred in the minds of the
leaders of many of the underdeveloped
nations. There will probably be less ap-
prehension over the threat of major war
or Communism and greater concern over
regional and local issues. (Para. 44)

8. However, there will still be important
limitations on the Bloc’s ability to influ-
ence or manipulate the policies of the
underdeveloped nations. With the possi-
ble exception of Afghanistan, trade with
the Bloc will probably remain consider-
ably smaller than trade with non-Com-
munist states. Moreover, the experience
of the US in the postwar period has dem-
onstrated that close economic relations
with the underdeveloped areas can be a
source of friction as well as political gain.

Sree?
Page-5
Srernee 3

Although the people and leaders of some
underdeveloped states may distrust the
US more than the USSR, the leaders of
even the neutralist states have had to
contend with Communist challenges to
power and they will be watchful accord-
ing to their own lights of the conse-
quences of dealing with the Bloc. If the
Bloc should make early attempts to ex-
ploit the growing economic dependence
of Burma, Egypt, or Afghanistan to ob-
tain political actions contrary to the de-
sires or interests of local leaders, these
governments would probably react by
attempting to reduce or break off their
arrangements with the Bloc, particularly
if Western nations made known their
willingness to assist the nation involved
through the readjustment period. These
considerations will probably cause the
Bloc to proceed with caution and to em-
phasize efforts to gain the good will and
confidence of key indigenous groups and
leaders. (Para. 46)

9. Weighing general Bloc assets and
limitations, we believe that the Bloc’s
ability to influence developments in the
Arab-Asian area is likely to increase sig-
nificantly over the next few years. By
associating itself with these nations on
colonial issues, by expanding economic
relations, and by exploiting other psycho-
logical and political conditions, the Bloc
may be able to increase Communist influ-

ence and to weaken significantly the role
of the West in the area. Although there
is no substantial immediate danger that
the underdeveloped countries will be
drawn formally into the Bloc through
these tactics, over the longer term an in-
creasing number of Arab-Asian countries
may reach the point, already reached by a
few, where their foreign policies parallel
or actually support the Bloc on most key
issues. In a few cases the way may ulti-
mately be prepared for actual Commu-
nist take-overs through coercion or in-
ternal subversion. (Para. 49)

10. If present Bloc policies are continued,
many of the underdeveloped countries
will probably come increasingly to regard
the USSR and Communist China as ac-
ceptable members of the international
community. The underdeveloped coun-
tries will probably enter into such eco-
nomic or political relations with the Bloc
as appear, on balance, to further their
own national interests. Nonetheless,
they will continue in varying degrees to
be responsive to the West because of long
established personal, cultural, military,
economic, and political ties. The lasting
political effects of the new Bloc policies
on underdeveloped countries will depend
heavily upon the degree to which the
West is genuinely interested ‘in their
problems, understands their motives, and
responds to their needs. (Para. 51)

DISCUSSION

1. THE RECENT EVOLUTION OF
SINO-SOVIET POLICY

11. The Sino-Soviet Bloc has sought with in-
creasing vigor and confidence, especially since
the spring of 1955, to portray the Bloc as a
defender of peace and as a proponent of
mutually beneficial political, economic, and

cultural relations with the outside world. A
wide range of diplomatic and propaganda
moves has been aimed at reducing apprehen-
sions of the likelihood of general war, and at
disassociating from Bloc policy the stigma of
subversive violence, militarism, and aggres-
sion which was largely responsible for the con-

rere
Page-6
CECREE 4

siderable measure of free world unity in the
postwar years. The Bloc is also attempting
to present the current world struggle as one
of peaceful competition between the out-
moded and weakening forces of Capitalism
and the increasingly strong and “progressive”
forces of “Socialism.”

12. It has become increasingly evident that
the new policy proceeds primarily from a grad-
ual development by the Communist leadership
of a basic reappraisal of the world situation.
The.Communists have apparently concluded
that (a) under present circumstances the
hazards of major war are so great that mili-
tary pressure or local aggression which in-
volve significant risks of such a war cannot
constitute a part of rational policy, and (b)
Free World alliances and the uncommitted
areas are more vulnerable to various forms of
political and economic inducements than to
violence and threats of force. These judg-
ments probably provide the basis for the re-
statements of doctrine at the 20th Congress
of the Soviet Communist Party on the in-
evitability of war, the role of violence in Com-
munist revolution, and the admissibility of
alternative routes to socialism. The likeli-
hood that the conditions on which Communist
policies are now based will not fundamentally
change in the foreseeable future, plus the
pains taken to provide the new policy with
adequate doctrinal underpinning, indicate
that current Communist tactics are likely to
continue for some time to come.

13. Moreover, since the death of Stalin, Soviet
leaders have also been reappraising their eco-
nomic situation. In this reappraisal, they
probably recognized that Soviet economic de-
velopment had reached the stage at which an
expansion of trade, especially with underde-
veloped areas, would help to meet growing
Bloc needs for agricultural and other raw
materials. At the same time, they recognized
that an expansion of trade could be an effec-
tive instrument of the new policy of persua-
sion.

14. The present phase of Bloc policy is in-
tended to cultivate conditions in the free
world which will permit expansion of Com-
munist influence. An initial objective of Bloc

leaders is to convince members of the Western
alliances that the new Communist policy has
eliminated the danger of Communist aggres-
sion, thus removing the prime motivation of
those alliances. They hope that, thus de-
prived of their rationale, the alliances will
falter in their joint military efforts and ulti-
mately be dissolved. The Communists also
hope that their current posture will lessen
Western and increase Communist influence
in the underdeveloped nations. Current
Communist tactics are designed to advance
Communist long term objectives without seri-
ous risk of major war.

ll. BLOC TACTICS IN UNDERDEVELOPED
AREAS

15. The underdeveloped areas of the world
which are now being wooed by the Communist
Bloc contain 40 percent of the world’s popula-
tion and 60 percent of the population outside
the Sino-Soviet Bloc. Parts of the area in-
volved rim the southern borders of the Bloc,
flank the sea route from Gibraltar to Singa-
pore, and contain important western defense
installations. Although the areas produce
only a small percentage of the world’s indus-
trial output, they account for about 25 per-
cent of world trade. Through trade some of
the underdeveloped countries play important
roles in the economy of the free world.

16. Although there are wide variations in eco-
nomic, social, and political conditions within
this vast area, the general atmosphere is one
of political instability deriving from a complex
process of rapid economic and cultural
change. Nationalist feeling is intense and
reaction against foreign influence or domina-
tion is strong. Increasing awareness of social
inequalities, poverty, and economic backward-
ness is causing unrest and ferment, and there
is a widespread desire for an increase in the
standard of living. In many areas, there are
oppressive or weak political regimes which
are increasingly incapable of coping with the
complex problems confronting them. From
these common problems and on the basis of
race and geography, a sense of identity has
developed among many of these nations and
they tend to stand together in blocs on many
international issues,

SHORES
Page-7
Keeraa 5

Political Tactics

17. The Sino-Soviet Bloc is wooing the under-
developed areas by identifying itself with anti-
colonial and nationalist aspirations. Nearly
all of the underdeveloped countries have at
some time in their history come under the
domination of one or another of the Western
Powers. Even those countries which have
been led by experience, ideology, or common
interest to align themselves with the West are
prone to be suspicious of Western intentions.
In contrast, the USSR and Communist China,
although hampered in some areas by their
past support of armed Communist rebellion,
are now free to a considerable degree of the
odium of imperialism. The Soviet record of
imperialism in the Baltic states, Eastern Eu-
rope, and Asia is not well understood in the
underdeveloped areas. Only a few of the
underdeveloped countries have experienced
direct threats from the Bloc and the Bloc’s
virulent propaganda attacks on Western im-
perialism have led some of them to believe
that relations with the Bloc can act as a
counterweight to Western influence or the
threat of encroachment.

18. The Sino-Soviet Bloc is attempting to
cultivate friendly relations with existing gov-
ernments, including some formerly labeled
as “reactionary” in Communist propaganda,
by expressing sympathy with their special
national interests. In particular the Bloc
has offered support or encouragement to coun-
tries that are involved in local conflicts, in
struggles for independence, or in irredentist
issues, especially where the opposing party is
aligned with the West. The Sino-Soviet Bloc
has a considerable degree of maneuverability
in these situations because, unlike the US, it
is free of commitments to the colonial powers,
and because the Soviet record of imperialism
is not well understood.

19. The Bloc has also intensified its efforts to
identify US policy with danger of war and the
USSR with the hope of peace; it stresses that
present world conditions, particularly the
growth of Soviet strength, give prospects of
lasting normalization of international rela-
tions. Most of the underdeveloped nations

have a great fear of major war and they desire
to remain aloof from international power
struggles and to devote their energies to in-
ternal development and local affairs. They
tend to be critical of US efforts to extend the
area of military cooperation and to be recep-
tive to Blog protestations of peaceful intent.

20. The Bloc is emphasizing the similarity of
its past and present economic problems with
those of the underdeveloped areas. The Com-
munists have proclaimed the success of their
systems in rapidly transforming their own
backward countries into industrial powers
through socialist organization and the full
mobilization of domestic resources. The
appeal of Communist experience is particular-
ly strong in Asia where many members of the
educated elite have been conditioned to think
along Marxist lines. Furthermore, in many
countries the traditions of individual freedom
and democratic principles are weak and thus
do not serve as an effective barrier to the
acceptance of authoritarian systems. Even
where the Communist cost in human suffering
is recognized, there is a temptation to believe
that appropriate elements of the system could
be utilized without serious damage to political
and human freedom. The private enterprise
system tends to be associated with the in-
equality and exploitation of colonial rule.
Throughout most of the area, a large measure
of state control of the economy is accepted as
both desirable and essential.

21. The Communists are attempting to play
down the antidemocratic aspects of their pro-
gram. By presenting their doctrine as the
embodiment of progressive social change, they
hope to gain the support of other advocates of
social change, particularly the Socialist par-
ties. Their aim is to end the isolation of the
Communist parties and to provide a basis for
“united fronts” with Socialists and National-
ists.

22, An important element of the Bloc’s appeal
in the underdeveloped areas is its relative free-
dom from the taint of discrimination against
colored races which is reinforced in some
minds by the fact that one of the two major
partners in the Bloc is a nonwhite nation. By

SHreREe
Page-8
\)

contrast, Western racial barriers in colonial
areas and in some parts of the US are bitterly
resented by many Asians and Africans.

Economic Tactics

23. A key element of the current Bloc Policy
has been an unprecedented effort to establish
a wide range of economic relations with un-
derdeveloped countries. This economic pro-
gram has included new and expanded trade,
a modest and selective credit program, and a
growing emphasis on the training and provi-
sion of technicians and advisors. The Bloc
is exploiting two basic conditions in the under-
developed areas (a) the large extent to which
the economic livelihood of most underdevel-
oped nations depends on the production and
export of raw materials and foodstuffs, and
(b) the desire of most governments of the
underdeveloped countries to accelerate eco-
nomic development while simultaneously in-
creasing welfare services and consumption.

24, The underdeveloped countries, even under
the most favorable economic conditions, in-
ternally and in world markets, lack the re-
sources to carry through a rapid program of
economic development. They generally lack
sufficient trained personnel to: (a) plan and
integrate a development program; (b) mod-
ernize their monetary and fiscal systems to
channel internal resources to essential invest-
ments; and (c) install and operate modern
transport and manufacturing equipment.
Few of the underdeveloped countries have
sufficient capital resources for the volume of
investment which must be made concurrently
in all basic sectors of the economy. Such in-
creased investment is essential to break the
depressive effects of growing populations and
increasing consumer requirements and to pro-
vide a margin for additional investment and
growth. In particular, their export earning
capacity is inadequate to finance imports of
capital equipment while maintaining the min-
imum import of consumer goods necessary to
restrict inflationary tendencies and allay pop-
ular unrest. Progress in development on the
basis of domestic resources alone would at
best be slow, even if stern and authoritarian
measures were taken to restrict consumption
and to channel all available resources into

  

bs?!

capital investment. In many countries also,
there is an unwillingness to take the internal
measures necessary to carry out effective eco-
nomic programs.

25. The underdeveloped countries have not
been able to obtain sufficient development
capital from the West. Moreover, since 1954
their own capabilities for capital formation
have been reduced as a result of the ending of
the international boom in the demand for
food and some raw materials which followed
World War II and which was revived and ex-
tended by the Korean War. In particular,
agricultural prices are under pressure and ex-
porters’ stocks are growing burdensome. Non-
Communist markets are unable to absorb all
these stocks and some Western countries are
in fact burdened with surpluses of the same
commodities.

26. The USSR, as the world’s second indus-
trial power, and the European Satellites have
the capability of supplying a wide range of
capital goods and know-how to the under-
developed areas. Thus, the Bloc isina strong
position to exploit these conditions. Within
the last year it has made increasing efforts to
promote trade in Southeast Asia, South Asia,
the Near East, Africa, and in Latin America.
Further, the Bloc is now offering capital
equipment in exchange for bulk purchases of
raw materials and foodstuffs in selected coun-
tries. The Bloc has also offered capital goods
and technical services for economic develop-
ment, as well as arms, on the basis of low-
interest medium and long term credits, repay-
able in local currencies or commoiities. The
Bloc has demonstrated considerable flexibility
in meeting local conditions and has generally
shown a willingness to conclude agreements
without time consuming negotiations. It has
occasionally supported locally popular proj-
ects of marginal economic importance. The
Bloc has not required expressed political com-
mitments as a condition of trade or credit
agreements, but it has suggested in a number
of cases that a neutralist position would facili-
tate beneficial economic relations.

27. From the Bloc point of view, these eco-
nomic tactics have a rational basis of eco-
nomic advantage. The exchange of capital

SHORES
Page-9
Serene 7

goods for raw materials and foodstuffs will
tend to result in a net economic gain rather
than to impose a burden upon the Bloc econo-
my. The costs of capital goods in the Bloc
have declined as production has expanded, as
skills have developed, and as additional capital
investment has been applied. During the
same time, however, the costs of food and
some raw materials have risen with increasing
requirements, and the exhaustion of low-cost
production opportunities.

28. In 1954 both the European Satellites and
the USSR became for the first time net im-
porters of food, and such imports are likely to
continue to expand in view of the high costs of
additional production within the Bloc, the
growth in population and standards of living,
and continuing shift in relative costs in favor

of industrial production. The other side of
this picture is the emergence of the Satellites
as net exporters of capital goods to non-Bloc
countries in 1954. Although the Soviet Union
is still a substantial net importer of capital
goods from non-Bloc countries, its exports of
such goods, though still small in volume, have
rapidly increased in the last three years. In
addition, the total value of Bloc trade with
non-Bloc countries has risen from the postwar
low of $3 billion in 1953 to an estimated $4.4
billion in 1955.

29. As a result of new trade agreements, in-
creases in quotas under agreements already
in force, and credits, the volume of Bloc trade
(including arms shipments) with the under-
developed countries has increased significant-
ly in the past two years.

Sino-Soviet Bloc Trade with Non-Bloc Areas, 1953-1955 *

 

(Million of current dollars)

(Percentage increases)

 

1953 1954 1955” 1954/53 1955/54

Underdeveloped areas

Near East & Africa 193 244 310 26 27

Far East* 229 244 295 7 ai

Latin America 69 252 280 265 11

Subtotal 491 740 885 51 20
Other Non-Bloc

US & Canada 46 61 83 33 36

Australia & New

Zealand 86 88 70 2 20

Japan 42 72 129 wae 19

Hong Kong 245 189 190 23, 0

Western Europe 2,089 2,440 3,023 17 24

Subtotal 2,508 2,850 3,495 14 23
TOTAL 2,999 3,590 4,380 20 22

 

* All data are based on official statistics released by Free World countries.

Sino-

Soviet Bloc import and export data were extracted directly from Free World
export and import data respectively. Ordinarily, Free World export data are

presented on an FOB basis and imports on a CIF basis.

rounded to the nearest million.

All figures have been

"Data for 1955 have been partly estimated by annual rating of information avail-
able as of 1 March 1956. Figures for the Near East and Africa probably are

somewhat low.

‘Excluding Japan and Hong Kong but including Indla.
Page-10
SEGRE . 8

30. Despite recent increases, the Bloc still has
a relatively small share of the total trade of
most underdeveloped nations. Only eight of
these countries conducted more than five per-
cent of their total trade with the Bloc in 1955.

Percent of total trade with the Bloc

 

1954 1955 (prelim.)

Burma 7 5.3
Ceylon 119 61
Indonesia 16 5.2
Pakistan 5.6 6.7
Iran 12.6 12.9
Egypt 9.7 14.1
Turkey 12. 20.

Argentina 8.6 8.6

31. The Bloc’s trade with underdeveloped
countries will almost certainly show a more
substantial gain in 1956 than in 1955. Of
particular importance for the short run, Bloc
trade will probably increase significantly with
those countries which the Bloc has concen-
trated on as being the most promising initial
targets of opportunity, namely, India, Burma,
Egypt, Indonesia, Afghanistan, and Turkey.
In the case of Burma, the USSR has recently
agreed to purchase 400,000? tons of rice an-
nually over the next four years or an amount
equivalent to about one-sixth of Burma’s 1955
total exports. Similar arrangements in lesser
amounts with the Satellites and Communist
China may raise Burmese trade with the Bloc
to about one-third of its total trade. Al-
though the Bloc supplied only seven percent
of Egypt's imports in 1955, Bloc purchases
accounted for 27 percent of Egypt’s exports.
Egypt's total trade with the Bloc will probably
increase considerably in 1956 as a result of
additional Bloc purchases of cotton and the
delivery of Bloc goods and arms.

32. In addition, the credits already extended
by the Bloc to underdeveloped countries will
lead to an increase in Bloc trade with the area.
The program of Bloc credits to underdeveloped
countries is modest in scope, and totaled
about $500 million as of March 1956.3 Of
this total, Egypt (involving primarily arms),
Afghanistan, and India received medium and
long term credits totaling about $450 million.

"In 1955 Burma produced 6.3 million tons of rice
and exported 1.6 million tons.
‘This total excludes Yugoslavia and Finland.

Minimum Known Credits and Possible Credits Ex-
tended by the Sino-Soviet Bloc to Underdeveloped

Countries, in millions of US $
1 January 1954 —- 1 March 1956*

 

 

Bloc
Excluding

Recipient Areas USSR. USSR Total Bloc
Middle East

Turkey o 1. 7.

Egypt ae 174.7 174.7

Iran ae 15 15

Jordan 0.2 0.2

Syria oe 13.9 13.9

Total 197.3 197.3
South and Southeast Asta

Afghanistan 6.8 15. 121.8

India 128 0 32.8 157.8

Indonesla : 19 19

Total 231.8 55.7 287.5
Latin America

Argentina 4. 15. 19.

Total a 1B. 19.
GRAND TOTAL 3

268. 503.8 °

“This table was compiled from Appendix A. To-
tals represent minimum estimates and do not
include projects for which no value estimates are
available.

‘In addition, the Bloc extended $20 million in
credits to Finland, $1.6 million to Iceland, and
$299 million to Yugoslavia.

At the minimum an additional $325 million in
Bloc credit offers are under active considera-
tion in the underdeveloped countries. To date
the USSR has concentrated its credits in
South and Southeast Asia while the Satellites
have taken the lead in extending credits to
the Middle East.

33. Future Trends in Bloc Economic Tactics.
We believe that the Bloc will seek to expand
substantially both its credits and its trade
with underdeveloped countries, while exert-
ing every effort to live up to commitments
made. In so doing the Bloc will seek to de-
velop significant economic relations with a
greater number of underdeveloped countries,
but will probably continue to weight its efforts
quantitatively toward a relatively few coun-
tries, particularly those wherein it sees the
prospects for greatest political success. The
distribution of Bloc trade will also be affected
toa lesser degree by growing needs for selected
strategic raw materials; for example, bauxite
and industrial diamonds.

BECRHE
Page-11
Sreree 9

34. The Bloc is almost certainly not motivated
to undertake foreign economic programs of
such magnitude and content as to stimulate
substantial economic development in any
country except possibly in certain peripheral
areas such as Burma and Afghanistan. In the
latter countries the Bloc may desire to develop
showcase samples of the benefits of close rela-
tions with the Bloc. In addition, a number
of other factors may have a limiting effect
on the scope of the Bloc’s economic program
in the next few years. In their dealings
with some underdeveloped countries, the Bloc
will encounter administrative and psycholog-
ical difficulties. The extension of the Bloc
program will also depend to some extent on
how successfully the Bloc can compete with
Western enterprise and technology in these
areas. Moreover, the Bloc will probably wish
to avoid over-extending itself in the early
stages of the program in view of the political
importance it will attach to fulfilling its com-
mitments. Finally, in some cases, the USSR
must weigh its economic commitments out-
side the Bloc against the requirements for
economic development within the Bloc.

35. We are unable to estimate with precision
the extent to which the Bloc will be willing
or able to expand its economic dealings with
the underdeveloped areas. By 1960, it appears
likely that total Bloc trade (including arms)
with the underdeveloped countries will be
around $2 billion annually (about double the
1955 figure). To reach such a level would
involve a rate of increase about equal to that
of total Bloc trade with non-Bloc countries
from 1953-1955, and below the 1953-1955 rate
of increase with the underdeveloped areas
alone. In any event, it is clear that the Bloc
will increasingly offer serious and continuing
competition to the West as a market and as a
source of capital and technical assistance.

Ul. PROBABLE EFFECTS OF BLOC TACTICS

36. The new Bloc policy marks the emergence
of the Bloc as a formidable competitor with
the West, in the political, economic, and psy-
chological spheres, for position and influence
among many of the underdeveloped nations.
The Bloc now presents a posture of peace, an
attitude of sympathetic understanding of the

needs and aspirations of the underdeveloped
areas, and a system of cultural and political
values attractive to many of Asia’s intellec-
tuals and political elites. It points to the
impressive record of Soviet industrial growth
as a model for the economic development of
backward areas. In addition, the Bloc repre-
sents itself as being capable of supplying cap-
ital goods, credits, and technical assistance.
Although the ultimate objectives of the Bloc
remain unchanged, its immediate objectives
are probably merely to increase the attrac-
tions of neutralism and to expand Bloc in-
fluence.

Economic Effects

37. The Bloc has already made significant
progress in expanding its economic relations
with a number of countries, most notably
Burma, India, Egypt, Turkey, and Afghani-
stan. The reasons for this success have varied
from country to country. For instance,
Burma was receptive to Bloc orders largely
because of its inability to dispose of its large
rice surplus in Western markets; India was
able to obtain certain capital equipment from
the Bloc on more attractive terms than were
available in the West; Egypt could not obtain
the arms it desired from Western sources; and
Afghanistan wanted to bolster its position
vis-a-vis Pakistan.

38. The receptivity of other countries to Bloc
offers will be conditioned by similar factors.
Countries which are aligned with the West or
have close economic ties with Western coun-
tries or receive substantial aid from the US,
will wish to avoid jeopardizing these relations.
However, even these countries are likely to
increase their trade with the Bloc, particularly
if the neutralist states appear to be profiting
from increased relations with the Bloc. Tur-
key and Iran have already done so because of
internal economic difficulties and Pakistan,
Cambodia, Greece, Thailand, numerous Latin
American states, and the Philippines will
probably investigate the possibilities for in-
creased trade with the Bloc. In some cases
the primary motive will be to increase export
markets, but in others the purpose may be to
elicit additional support and attention from
the US,

SEOREE
Page-12
Serr 10

39. Given equal opportunities and credit fa-
cilities, there is little desire among under-
developed countries for Bloc trade in prefer-
ence to Free World trade. On the contrary,
Western trade provides foreign exchange
usable in other markets while most deals with
the Bloc are on a barter basis. Thus the basic
appeal of the Bloc market is as a source of ex-
port earnings not available in the Free World
which can be used to obtain capital goods from
the Bloc. In view of this, receptivity to Bloc
trade offers would probably weaken if the Bloc
were to re-export major quantities of bulk
commodities bought from the underdeveloped
countries.

40. However, if the Bloc lives up to its agree-
ments, delivers the goods, and is discreet in its
meddling in the internal affairs of other
states, most of the underdeveloped countries
will increasingly accept Bloc overtures at face
value. There will probably be a gradual, and
in some cases substantial, increase in the level
of normal trade, in dependence on Soviet tech-
nicians, and in the extent to which the various
countries will be willing to mortgage their
futures through long term credit from the
Bloc. Moreover, the readiness of neutralist
and independent states to purchase arms from
the Bloc will probably increase.

41. If the Bloc economic programs should con-
tinue to expand at the present rate and fol-
low the present general pattern of concentra-
tion, they will alleviate some of the immediate
economic difficulties of a number of under-
developed nations, for example, Burma, Af-
ghanistan, Argentina, and Turkey. In these
countries, and possibly several others, Bloc
purchases could have a stabilizing effect on
export prices, and could assist in maintaining.
income and employment in key industries. A
number of underdeveloped countries, in which
a few activities constitute an important part
of their economies, may develop a degree of
economic dependence on the Bloc out of pro-
portion to the percentage of their trade with
the Bloc. At the same time, however, Bloc
trade and credit will probably not facilitate a
substantial degree of economic development in
any of the underdeveloped countries with the
possible exception of Burma and Afghanistan.

This is so primarily because the magnitude of
capital required generally far exceeds that
likely to be accumulated on the basis of pres-
ently estimated Bloc trade and credits.

Political Effects

42. The total political effect of the new Bloc
policies toward underdeveloped countries is
not necessarily proportional to the extent of
economic relations with these countries. In
a few cases (e. g., Turkey) a high proportion
of trade with the Bloc may not be accom-
panied by any substantial shift in orientation
and internal politics. However, in other sit-
uations the reverse may be true —i. e., al-
though the economic relationship may be
small in percentage or quantity terms, the
shift in political alignment may be significant.

43. In general, Bloc tactics are already hav-
ing important political effects in the Arab-
Asian area. The image of the Bloc as a prin-
cipal proponent of peace and disarmament
and as a benefactor of the underdeveloped
nations has become credible to many people
in this area. Existing neutralist tendencies
have been reinforced and several states now
aligned with the West have begun to weigh
the benefits of a more “independent” posture.
The availability of Bloc assistance has led
some nations to believe that they are now in
a stronger position to bargain with the West
for aid. The availability of Bloc aid has con-
tributed to the acerbation of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. US concern with the Bloc threat in
neutralist areas has led to cries of neglect
from Pakistan and the Philippines. Several
of the nations aligned.with the West have
become sufficiently impressed with Bloc prot-
estations of peace to become critical of US
emphasis on military aid and have called for
increased economic support. Bloc tactics have
also contributed to the mounting pressures
against the maintenance of Western trade
controls.

44. If the Bloc continues its present tactics
over the next few years, present political
trends in the underdeveloped countries are
likely to be accentuated. In particular, the
appeal of neutralism will probably grow in
Asia and the commitments of Thailand and

SECRES
Page-13
Stone il

the Baghdad Pact nations to regional security
arrangements will probably be weakened.
Issues dividing the West and the Bloc will
probably be further blurred in the minds of
the leaders of many of the underdeveloped
nations. There will probably be less appre-
hension over the threat of major war or Com-
munism and greater concern over regional
and local issues.

45. The new Bloc diplomacy and its economic
programs will provide the Bloc increased op-
portunities for influencing government offi-
cials and intellectual leaders by direct per-
sonal contacts. Because socialism is regarded
favorably in many underdeveloped countries,
especially in Asia, the psychological and ideo-
logical effects of Bloc economic policies may
be more profound than has been the case with
Western aid programs. Although Commu-
nism as an open political force is not danger-
ous in most countries of the area, the postwar
generation of young intellectuals may ignore
the history of Communism, accept the present
line of propaganda, and develop a close sense
of identification with Communist China and
the USSR. At the same time, the new look
in Soviet diplomacy, the denigration of Stalin
who has been identified with the excesses of
Communism, and Communist overtures to the
world socialist movement may help to increase
the influence of the local Communist parties.
In Indonesia, Syria, and other countries of the
Middle East and Africa, the nationalists too
frequently feel that they can cooperate with
the Communists as long as it suits their pur-
pose and then drop them. The danger lies in
the progress which the Communists may make
in infiltration of the ranks of the armies, the
bureaucracy, and intellectual circles during
the period of cooperation.

46. However, there will still be important
limitations on the Bloc’s ability to influence
or manipulate the policies of the underdevel-
oped nations. With the possible exception of
Afghanistan, trade with the Bloc will probably
remain considerably smaller than trade with
non-Communist states. Moreover, the ex-
perience of the US in the postwar period has
demonstrated that close economic relations
with the underdeveloped areas can be a

source of friction as well as political gain. Al-
though the people and leaders of some under-
developed states may distrust the US more
than the USSR, the leaders of even the neu-
tralist states have had to contend with Com-
munist challenges to power and they will be
watchful according to their own lights of the
consequences of dealing with the Bloc. If
the Bloc should make early attempts to ex-
ploit the growing economic dependence of
Burma, Egypt, or Afghanistan to obtain polit-
ical actions contrary to the desires or inter-
ests of local leaders, these governments would
probably react by attempting to reduce or
break off their arrangements with the Bloc,
particularly if Western nations made known
their willingness to assist the nation involved
through the readjustment period. These
considerations will probably cause the Bloc to
proceed with caution and to emphasize efforts
to gain the good will and confidence of key
indigenous groups and leaders.

47. At the same time, important factors will
work against an increase in the strength of
domestic Communist movements. Offers of
cooperation by local Communists have been
rejected by the nationalist movements in
North Africa and in Asia and Latin America.
The local Communists probably will not be
able to escape completely from the distrust
surrounding their motives which derives from
many instances of open conflict with local
nationalists. It is possible that the transition
to peaceful, united front tactics in some cases
will reduce the vitality of the indigenous Com-
munist parties and subject them to debilitat-
ing internal disputes. Moreover, a major part
of any credit for economic progress derived
from Bloc assistance is likely to be taken by
the nationalist, non-Communist governments
of the underdeveloped nations. To the extent
that there is economic progress, it will tend
to alleviate certain chronic grievances habit-
ually exploited by the domestic Communists,
and to provide constructive employment for
the young intellectuals who in all underdevel-
oped countries are the most dissatisfied with
existing conditions and form the primary tar-
get of Communist propaganda.

SHORES
Page-14
shone : 12

48. To the extent that it takes sides in the
quarrels of other nations, the Bloc will tend
to alienate one side or the other and reduce
its influence abroad. The Soviet Union has
already found it awkward to take a position
in the conflicts between the French and the
North Africans. While seeming to favor the
Arabs against the Israelis, it has so far re-
frained from going anything like all the way
in doing so. It may find it expedient in the
future not to repeat the firm stand it took
on Kashmir and Pushtunistan in December.
Almost inevitably, as it is drawn deeper into
the affairs of other peoples, the Soviet Union
will find that it is disappointing at least as
many hopes as it is fulfilling.

49. Weighing general Bloc assets and limita-
tions and apart from the major variables dis-
cussed below, it seems that the Bloc’s ability
to influence developments in the Arab-Asian
area is likely to increase significantly over the
next few years. By associating itself with
these nations on colonial issues, by expanding
economic relations, and by exploiting other
psychological and political conditions, the
Bloc may be able to weaken significantly the
role of the West in the area. Although there
is no substantial immediate danger that the
underdeveloped countries will be drawn into
the Bloc through these tactics, over the longer
term an increasing number of Arab-Asian
countries may reach the point, already
reached by a few, where their foreign policies
parallel or actually support the Bloc on most
key issues. In a few cases the way may ulti-

mately be prepared for actual Communist
take-overs through coercion or internal sub-
version.

 

50. Effect of a Communist Take-over. If the
Communists were to take-over any under-
developed country, the effect on over-all Com-
munist influence would vary according to the
particular circumstances involved. If a legiti-
mate government were overthrown by violence
or subversion, the image of respectability
which the Bloc is striving so assiduously to
build up would be seriously impaired. This
effect would be much less marked in a case
where the regime unseated by the Commu-
nists was considered a Western puppet or
otherwise unrepresentative of nationalist
groups, or if Communists came to power by
apparently legitimate electoral processes. In
time, the reaction of other governments would
probably be determined largely by the manner
in which the new Communist-dominated re-
gime conducted itself with respect to affairs
of interest to the various non-Communist
states.

51. Effects of US and Western Policies. If
present Bloc policies are continued, many of
the underdeveloped countries will probably
come increasingly to regard the USSR and
Communist China as acceptable members of
the international community. The under-
developed countries will probably enter into
such economic or political relations with the
Bloc as appear, on balance, to further their
own national interests. Nonetheless, they will

‘continue in varying degrees to be responsive

to the West because of long established per-
sonal, cultural, military, economic, and politi-
cal ties. The lasting political effects of the
new Bloc policies on underdeveloped countries
will depend heavily upon the degree to which
the West is genuinely interested in their prob-
lems, understands their motives, and responds
to their needs.
Page-15
Recipient

Middle East

Egypt

Estimated minimum total for Egypt ¥

Appendix A

Sino-Soviet Bloc Credits to Non-Bloc Countries
—Emmeeeene Stet s to Non-Bloc Countries
1 January 1954 - 1 March 1956

Bloc

Country

Czech.

GDR

Hungary

USSR

Poland

Projects

Contracts * Offers *

Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits

Arms

Ceramics factory

100 third class RR cars

Steel bridge for the Is-
mailia Canal 335’ long
and 98’ wide

Footgear factory

Power installations

Construction of shipyard
at Alexandria, plans,
equipment and_ techni-
cians being provided

Bridge at Helwan on the
Nile; 800 meters long
and 12 meters wide; de-
sign, construction, and
installation

Seven swing bridges over
the Nile; design, con-
struction, and installation

93 diesel RR engines

100 third class coaches

30 first class coaches

10 trains, 6 units each

Thermoelectric power,
45,000 KW

Aswan Dam; designs,
equipment, and techni-
cians

Equipment. and __ techni-
cians for a nuclear phys-
ics lab

Enamel-ware foundry
300 RR box cars

140.0 (est)
12
3.2 (est)

U
0.1

3.2

3.0 (est)

200.0 (est)

U

1.0 (est)
0.6 (est)

141.2 33.5 200.0 0.0

13
Page-16
CHCRET

Appendix A (Cont'd)

 

Bloc
Recipient Country Projects Contracts * Offers *
Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits
Middle East
Iran Czech. Refrigeration plant; daily
capacity of 50 tons U
Plywood factory including
power station U
Sugar refinery 1.5 (est)
GDR Equipment for an ice factory U
Estimated minimum total for Iran» 0.0 15 0.0 0.0
Jordan Poland Preparation of plans for
reconstruction of the He-
jaz RR running through
Syria, Jordan, and Saudi
Arabia 0.2¢
Reconstruction of the He-
jaz RR 22.0 ¢ (est)
Czech. Textile factory U
Estimated minimum total for Jordan» 0.0 0.24 0.0 22.0¢
Lebanon Hungary Stadium U
Czech. Several installations in-
cluding plants for ceram-
ics, paper, sugar refin-
ing, shoes, and electric
power U
GDR Equipment for cement plant 1.0
USSR 400 spinning machines U
General economic assistance U
Estimated minimum total for Lebanon » 0.0 U 0.0 1.0
Saudi Arabia GDR Cement plant 5.0
Poland Survey and reconstruction
of Hejaz RR ce
Estimated minimum total for Saudi Arabia 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0¢
Syria Czech. Arms (principally tanks) 6.0
Sugar refinery including
distillery, power plant,
and other auxiliary unit LT
Two cement plants 4.0 (est)
China factory 0.2
Construction of Damascus
International Airport 10.0
GDR Cement plant; 200 tons
daily capacity 1.3
Peer 14
Page-17
Recipient

Middle East

Syria
(Cont’d)

Appendix A (Cont'd)

Bloc
Country Projects

GDR Cotton spinning mill; 3,800
(Cont'd) spindles; including dye

worl
Dry-cell battery plant
equipment

Munitions plant to make
20 mm shells and gre-
nade casings

Hungary Three flour mills

Poland Preparation of plans for
reconstruction of the He-
jaz RR running from Da-
mascus (Syria) to Me-
dina (Saudi Arabia) via
Ma’an (Jordan)

Reconstruction of Hejaz RR

USSR Cement plant; daily capac-
ity of 200 to 300 tons

Czech., Oil refinery; annual capac-

USSR, ity of one million tons.

Rumania Equipment and_ tech-
cians to be_ provided.
Each has submitted a
separate bid.

Estimated minimum total for Syria >

Yemen

USSR Industrial plants and tech-
nical assistance

Estimated minimum total for Middle East »

South and Southeast Asia

Afghanistan

USSR POL storage tanks
Silos, flour mill, bakery
Road paving in Kabul
$100 million credit accept-
ed in Jan 1956 reported-
ly allocated by Afghan
Gov't as follows:
Road and bridge con-
struction
Education
Health
Police
Industrial equipment
and technical services
Arms
Miscellaneous

Contracts *

Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits

6.0

147.2

12

2.1

mre
Nanos

gon Noms
ooo ocoo

0.5 (est)
U
U
0.26
19 0.0
43.1 200.0

Offers *

22.0 (est)

2.0 (est)

22.4
56.44

lz «

15
Page-18
SECRET

Appendix A (Cont’d)

Bloc
Recipient Country Projects Contracts *

Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits

South and Southeast Asia
Som aie woubheast Asia

Afghanistan USSR Under the 2 Mar ’55 agree-
(Cont'd) (Cont'd) ment, partial utilization
of the $100 million loan
will include:
Construction of 2 hydro-
electric stations
Three motor repair shops
Motor road across the
Hindu Kush
Irrigation works
Physical and chemical
laboratory
Construction of airfield
at Bagrami
Reconstruction of air-
field at Kabul
Preparation of a ferti-
lizer factory

Poland Materials and technicians
for improvement of wa-
ter supply in Kabul and
Qandahar

Hungary Miscellaneous factaries, in-
cluding brick and glass
plants

Czech. Cement plant; capacity of
30,000 to 36,000 tons per

year 1.5
Miscellaneous industrial
projects, including:

Slaughter house
Dried fruit packing plant 8.5
Arms 5.0
Estimated minimum total for Afghanistan 121.8
ane ge umm borat tor Afghanistan cee
India USSR Steel mill at Bhilai; capac-

ity of one million ingot
tons per year; USSR
made designs and is sup-
plying equipment and
technicians 115.0
Steel file plant in Calcutta
Equipment for the petro-
leum industry over a
three-year period
Expansion of diamond ore
processing facilities, ca-

SECRET

0.0

0.0

16
Page-19
CHORES

Appendix A (Cont'd)

 

 

Bloc
Recipient Country Projects Contracts * Offers *
Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits
South and Southeast Asia
India US: pacity to be 10,000 tons

SR
(Cont'd) (Cont'd)

GDR

Czech.

Czech.,
GDR

Hungary

Czech.,
Hungary

Poland

of ore per day 10.0 (est)
Expansion of Hindustan

aircraft plant
Atomic reactor for research

Raw film manufacturing
plant 63
Power plant
Sugar refineries
Textile plant
Cement plants .
Plywood plant
Sheetmetal plant

Forge plant
2,050 RR cars 5.0
Camera factory; Czech.

providing equipment and

technicians U
Cement plant at Cherra-

punji, capacity of 400

tons per day 3.0 (est)
Hosiery mill; Czech. pro-

viding equipment and

technicians U
40 locomotives 7.6
Suspension bridge and aeri-

al ropeway 4.2
Thermal electric power sta-

tion at Cherrapunji 0.6 (est)

U

aa

.0 (est)

aqaqaaadq

Road construction
Motor repair shop U
Sugar factory U

Lignite processing plant U

153 locomotives 6.0 (est)
Wire and cable plant 0.1

Punjab hydroelectric proj-
ect — four 100,000 KW
turbine generators 20.0 (est)

Equipment and technical
assistance in the con-
struction of bridges and
ships

Estimated minimum total for India» 121.3 36.5 0.0 24.0
Page-20
encrea

Appendix A (Cont'd)

Bloc
Recipient Country

South and Southeast Asia

Projects

Contracts * Offers *
Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits

Indonesia GDR Sugar factory; capacity of
2,500 tons of sugar and
1,500 tons of spirits per
day 1.9
Copra processing plant —
equipment only U
Rumania Cement plant; annual ca-
pacity of 200,000-300,000
tons 4.0 (est)
Rumania, Each offered assistance in
Czech. developing oil fields in
No. Sumatra. Rumanian
technicians made sur-
veys in late '55 and have
offered both equipment
and technical assistance U
Czech, Canvas plant U
Hungary Hydroelectric power plant U
Poland, Each have offered capital
China equipment U
Estimated minimum total for Indonesia » 1.9 0.0 4.0 0.0
Estimated minimum total for
South and Southeast Asia ® 251.0 36.5 4.0 24.0
Europe.
Finland USSR Gold loan (accepted in
Feb. ’54) 10.0
Gold loan (accepted in
Jan. ’55) 10.0
Estimated minimum total for Finland 20.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Iceland Czech. Three small hydroelectric
units; Czech. to provide
power and transformer
stations 16
Czech., Cement plant; each offered
GDR, to provide equipment;
USSR capacity 250 tons per day 2.0 (est)
Estimated minimum total for Iceland 0.0 16 0.0 2.0
Turkey GDR Cement plant 2.0 (est)
Porcelain factory 13
Hungary Flour mill; pneumatic;
daily capacity, 50 tons U

ster.

18
Page-21
secrecy

Appendix A (Cont'd)

 

Bloc
Recipient Country Projects Contracts * Offers *
Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits
Europe
Turkey USSR Textile plant U
(Cont'd)
Czech. 150 RR passenger cars
Estimated minimum total for Turkey » 0.0 1.0 0.0 1.3
Yugoslavia USSR Line of credit in gold or

freely convertible cur-

rency 30.0
Line of credit for Soviet
Taw materials 54.0
7 Line of credit for capital
goods 120.0
Development of copper
mines at MAJDANPEK U

The following projects have
been specified as definite-
ly planned or in progress,
using Soviet equipment
and technical aid:
Nuclear reactor
Nitric mineral fertilizer

plant (annual capac-
ity of 100,000 tons)
Superphosphate plant
(annual capacity of
250,000 tons super-
phosphate and 120,000
sulphuric acid)
Thermoelectric power
station (100,000 KW)
Three lead and zinc
mines reconstruction
and expansion
Jet aircraft factory

Hungary Train manufacturing plant U
Grain elevator construc-
tion; technicians and
equipment — total ca-

pacity 30,000 tons U
Czech. Line of credit for capital
goods 15.0

Grain elevator construc-
tion equipment; total ca-

pacity 30,000 tons U
Poland Line of credit for capital
equipment 20.0

Railway rolling stock

SECrer 19
Page-22
SORT

Appendix A (Cont'd)

 

Bloc
Recipient Country Projects Contracts *
Known Possible
Credits Credits
Europe_
Yugoslavia Poland Machines for foodstuffs
(Cont’d) (Cont'd) industry
Mining equipment
Estimated minimum total for Yugoslavia » 299.0 0.0
Estimated minimum total for Europe? 319.0 8.6
Latin America
Argentina USSR Line of credit 4.0
Complete railroad electri-
fication system and elec-
tric locomotives
GDR Refrigeration plant; prepa-
ration of plants and pos-
sibly provision of equip-
ment U
Czech, Line of credit 15.0
Following projects report-
edly contracted for:
Skoda auto and truck
plant
Distillery: capacity of
66,000 gallons per day U
Arms (planes, tanks, artil-
lery)
Estimated minimum total for Argentina » 19.0 U
Bolivia Czech. Shoe manufacturing plant U
Estimated minimum total for Bolivia 0.0 U
Brazil Czech. Shoe manufacturing plant U
Arms
Poland Food products mfg. plant
(such as macaroni and
yeast)
Sugar mill
Complete installations of
textile machinery
Machine tools, petroleum
exploration equipment,
mining equipment, and
trucks
GDR Complete plants and
trained personnel
Estimated minimum total for Brazil 0.0 U

Offers *
Known Possible

Credits Credits

0.0 U
0.0 3.3
U
U
0.0 U
0.0 0.0
U
U
U
U
U
0.0 U

20
Page-23
seonesh

Appendix A (Cont'd)

 

 

 

 

- Bloc
Recipient Country Projects Contracts * Offers *
Known Possible Known Possible
Credits Credits Credits Credits
Latin America
Mexico GDR Plastics plant construction U
USSR Tractor factory equipment

and tractor parts U
Estimated minimum total for Mexico 0.0 0.0 0.0 U
Uruguay USSR Electrification systems for

railroads and electric lo-

comotives (supervised by

Soviet technicians) U
Estimated minimum total for Uruguay 0.0 0.0 0.0 U
Estimated minimum total for Latin America» 19.0 U 0.0 U
Africa
Ethiopia Czech. Sugar refinery 15

USSR Hospital; equipped and

staffed by Soviets U
Estimated minimum total for Ethiopia 0.0 0.0 1.5 U
Estimated minimum total for Africa” 0.0 0.0 1.5 U

|
|

Footnotes to Appendix A (gross)

“values have been rounded to the nearest tenth of a million. Where estimates of value were made the
abbreviation (est) appears. Where values are unknown and there was insufficient data on which to

base an estimate the letter U appears.
>Does not include those projects the values of which are unknown.
© Total cost of $65 million to be shared by Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia.
“Includes only 1/3 of RR cost.

*No amount is included for the RR because of current Saudi Arabian opposition to Soviet Bloc techni-

cians and engineers. Items, therefore, do not add to total.

SHORES

;
Page-24
