
Page-104
‘2
on

to
#)

 

Director of secret

Central
Intelligence

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED

Soviet Goals and Expectations
in the Global Power Arena

National Intelligence Estimate
Memorandum to Holders

“Secret

NIE 11-4-78
T July 1981

cm 294
Page-105
SEQRET
FORN

MEMORANDUM TO HOLDERS
OF NIE 11-4-78

SOVIET GOALS AND EXPECTATIONS
IN THE GLOBAL POWER ARENA

Information available as of 1 July 1981 wa
used in the preparation of this Memorandum

nent hes been
through
Page-106
SECRET
NQFORN

+

THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS,
EXCEPT AS NOTED IN THE TEXT.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the
Memorandum: .

The Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security
Agency, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Treasury.
Also Participating:
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
The Director of Inteffigence, Headquarters, Marine Corps
Page-107
SECRET

 

 
 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 
  

 

  
 
 

‘ORN

CONTENTS
Page
KEY JUDGMENTS .... 1
DISCUSSION ...... 1
The Central Role of Soviet Military Power .. 7
Soviet Relations With the United States 9
Western Europe .. 10
Eastern Europe i
China .... 12
The Third World 13
Southwest Asia 13
Africa .. 1s
Latin America 16
Domestic Pressures and Possible Policy Changes 16
Economic Problems. 16
Potential Social Instability ...... 7
Political Leadership and Succession 18
Page-108
SEQAET
NGFORN

KEY JUDGMENTS '

We believe that Soviet leaders regard military strength as the
foundation of the USSR’s status as a global superpower and as the most
critical factor underlying Soviet foreign policy. As it enters the 1980s,
the current Soviet leadership sees the heavy military investments made
during the last two decades paying off in the form of unprecedentedly
favorable advances across the military spectrum, and over the long term
in political gains where military power or military assistance has been
the actual instrument of policy or the decisive complement to Soviet
diplomacy.

Since the mid-1970s the Soviet Union has demonstrated a new
willingness to challenge the West in Third World settings as exemplified
by its actions in Angola and Ethiopia and its invasion of Afghanistan.
This more assertive Soviet international behavior is likely to persist as
long as the USSR perceives that Western strength is declining and as it
further explores the utility of its increased military power as a means of
realizing its global ambitions.

A central question for the 1980s is whether the Soviets may be
more inclined now than in earlier periods to confront the United States
in a crisis. Moscow still views such a prospect as extremely hazardous.

: However, in light of the change in the strategic balance and continued

expansion of general purpose forces, the Soviets are now more prepared
and may be more willing to accept the risks of confrontation in a serious
crisis, particularly in an area where they have military or geopolitical
advantages.

Policy Toward the United States

The Soviet leadership sees the present US administration as ba-
sically hostile to the USSR and as intent upon linking Soviet behavior in
the Third World to East-West relations, particularly arms control. Mos-
cow has categorically rejected this’ “linkage” and has reaffirmed its

‘In the vlew of the Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, and of the
Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury (National Security), the Memorandum tends to
understate the historical continuity of the ideological and political underpinnings of Soviet assertiveness
in the Thitd World. Moscow has pursued opportunities and advantages during periods of relatioe military

tocakness as well as during periods of enhanced strength (for example, Korea, Laos, Congo, Berlin, ond ~~

Egypt). The factors, moreover, that have influenced Soviet actions in these regions have been more their
view of the situation and opportunities and of the potential US responses to Soviet initlatioes than the
precise state of development of Soviet military programs.

1
segfer
Page-109
SE T

N@FORN
commitment to support “national liberation” movements. Although the
Soviets may doubt that the administration will actually be able to pur-
sue as assertive a policy toward the USSR as it has suggested it would,

they are probably reviewing their options for responding over the
longer term to that possibility.

The Soviets will continue to stress the importance of the arms con-
trol dialogue with Washington as the key to bilateral relations, and they.
will seek to resuscitate detente as the most promising way of constrain-
ing US military policies, of advancing their military and political objec-
tives, and of controlling the costs and risks of heightened international
tensions. If they conclude that there is no prospect in the near term for
meaningful results from renewed SALTS they may decide to go beyond
the SALT II constraints, seeking to place the onus for failure on the
United States and to exploit the breakdown to widen cleavages in the
AUantic Alliance. At the same time, Moscow would continue to urge the
United States to enter SALT negotiations and would undoubtedly at-
tempt to manipulate West European commitment to SALT in order to
increase the pressure on Washington.

Europe

Moscow apparently views the policies of the present administration
in Washington as likely to sharpen contradictions within the Atlantic
Alliance. The Soviets see a lack of Western consensus—for example, in
implementing NATO's program to modernize its long-range theater nu-
clear forces (LRTNE). They seek to exploit these differences with a dual
purpose: to pursue certain economic and political interests with the
Europeans even if Soviet relations with the United States deteriorate,
and to generate pressures on West European governments to influence
Washington toward greater flexibility in its dealings with the USSR.

The USSR perceives that some Western governments are more con-
cerned about military imbalances such as the Soviet preponderance in
LRTNE. The Soviets will continue to act politically to prevent the im-
plementation of NATO's force modernization programs (particularly
regarding US LRTNF) through arms control offers that would ratify
Soviet military advantages in Europe and through threats of counter
deployments. Ss

Poland presents the USSR with the most threatening and complex
challenge to its vital interests to emerge in Eastern Europe in the
postwar period. Soviet leaders are prepared to use military force to
preserve Soviet domination if they become convinced that changes tak-
ing place in Poland jeopardize the USSR's hegemony over Eastern Eu-
rope. However, because they know that the political, military, and eco-
nomic costs of intervention would be extremely high, they may bring

fer
Page-110
‘SE T
‘ORN:

themselves, so long as Poland's commitment to the Warsaw Pact is as-
sured, to live with a much-modified Communist system in Poland a

The Soviets probably anticipate that. their military intervention in
Poland, even under the most. favorable scenario, would cause a harsh
West European reaction and an initially unified US-West European
stand against them. They see this as removing or reducing, at least
temporarily, what they would otherwise expect to be the restraining
influence of the European allies on the United States. Nevertheless, the
Soviets would expect that differences between the United States and the
European allies on the scope, intensity, and duration of countermeas-
ures against the USSR would gradually emerge and provide the USSR
with opportunities for renewing detente with at least Western Europe.

China and Japan

The Soviets are deeply concerned by what they perceive as a quasi-
alliance evolving between the United States and China, and they will
seek to frustrate and to delay the emergence of a “Washington-Beijing- .
Tokyo axis” with links to NATO directed against Moscow. They will
also cooperate with the Vietnamese who, although wary of Moscow's
embrace, have become a junior partner in the Soviet effort to reduce US
influence in Indochina and encircle and neutralize China. The present
Soviet leaders developed the containment policy against China and built
the forces as well as the alliance and diplomatic framework to support

_athis policy. They are unlikely to abandon this policy for the extreme
alternatives of either far-reaching concessions to placate Chinese de-
mands or military measures to defeat or coerce the Chinese leaders.

Third World

The Soviets believe that they have the legitimate right and the
military strength to pursue am aggressive foreign policy in the Third
World. In seeking to assert the USSR’s status.as a power with broad,
global interests, they will attempt to:

— Create as well as to exploit opportunities stemming from re-
gional conflicts to entarge Soviet influence, using military assist-
ance and Soviet military power.

— Reduce Western—particularly US—influence by expanding
the USSR’s presence and encouraging -anti-Western regimes ~----
and elements.

"We are unable to judge the preci:
themselves have as yet determined thi

imit of Soviet tolerance, and we doubt that the Soviet leaders
Page-111
SEGAET
NYFORN

— Augment Soviet strategic reach and counter Western military
activity.

— Increase hard currency earnings as well as to promote political *
and strategic interests through arms sales.

More specifically, in the Middle East, Moscow seeks to:

— Preserve and exploit the strategic advantages it holds by virtue
of geography, potentially reinforced by the Soviet military
presence in Afghanistan, and by Soviet influence in Syria,
Libya, and South Yemen.

— Encourage a shift of Persian Gulf states from a pro-Western to
a more “nonaligned,” and eventually pro-Soviet position, while
at the same time helping “national liberation” movements that
might seize power in the Gulf. In this context the Soviets have.
attempted also to improve relations with the conservative, pro-
Western governments in the Gulf region.

— Improve Soviet access to and ultimately establish control over
Persian Gulf oil, with all that would mean for enhanced Soviet
leverage over Western Europe and Japan.

In attempting to realize these objectives, Soviet policymakers also
have to take into account more fundamental concerns. First, they must
approach with care any move that could lead to a direct military clash
with the United States. Second, they must assess the impact of actions in
the Gulf on their own global strategic, political, and economic interests.
-And, third, they must judge how they wish to affect—and to be seen
affecting—Gulf oil supplies to the West. Such considerations might not
deter the Soviet leaders if they were confronted by strategic opportu-
nities or severe challenges in the Gulf region. Soviet behavior during the
Iran-Iraq war and the evolution of its diplomatic Position on Gulf secu-
rity suggest, however, that Moscow seems more immediately interested
in averting a major US military buildup in the region and in advancing
Soviet claims for recognition as a legitimate coguarantor of Gulf secu-
rity than in risking the employment of its military forces.

Moscow's present goals in Afghanistan—not easily realized—are to
achieve political control-and military consolidation while avoiding the
introduction of major additional forces. The Soviets seek to establish
conditions for political domination and a continued military presence in
the country; the scale and nature of any Postinsurgency military pres-
ence will reflect their broader regional objectives. Moscow will increase
pressure on Pakistan through military threats, border incidents, subver-
sion, and possibly strengthened ties with India in an effort to persuade
Islamabad to accommodate Soviet objectives in Afghanistan.

4
sofher
Page-112
SEQRET
NJFORN

With respect to Iran and Iraq, the Soviets will seek an outcome of
their current war that leaves both dependent to some extent on the-- -
USSR, and that does not foreclose the possible further acquisition of oil
from Iraq by the USSR and other Soviet Bloc countries. The Soviets will
attempt to maintain Iraqi dependency on the USSR for arms supply,
and they will seek in the near term to prevent any improvement in US-
Tranian relations and to influence the Khomeini succession in a way that
might lead a follow-én regime to adopt a posture more favorable to
Soviet interests.

There will clearly be continuing opportunities in Africa for the
USSR and its proxies. The most acute problems Soviet and Soviet proxy ...
action’s in Africa may create for the United States in the next several
years could be:

A substantial increase in Soviet backing for or involvement in
the insurgency in Namibia.

Extension of the USSR’s influence elsewhere in Sub-Saharan
Africa by providing military assistance—either directly or
through the Cubans—to Soviet clients in order to develop or
exploit internal instability in Zaire, Zambia, or Zimbabwe, or
by collaborating to further Libyan aims in Chad and Sudan.

Soviet provision of significantly larger numbers of advisers and
equipment, or more support for the Cubans, in order to prop
up Moscow-oriented regimes in Angola, Mozambique, or Ethi-
opia if they are threatened by dissident elements or faced by

internal collapse.

Military conflict between a-Soviet client regime and a third
country—with or without Soviet encouragement. (For example,
Ethiopian encroachment on Somalia, or—less likely—clashes
between Angola or Mozambique and South Africa related to
Namibia or bilateral disputes.)

Inspired by the success of revolution in Nicaragua in 1979, the
USSR is actively seeking to promote insurgencies in Central America
aimed at bringing anti-US leftist regimes to power. Cuba is an increas-
ingly important outpost for Moscow. in the hemisphere, as well as a
surrogate in the Middle East and Africa. The Soviets will continue to use
Cuban airfields and other facilities and to underwrite the Cuban econ-
omy. Beginning in 1980 the USSR has actively been encouraging and
facilitating Castro's return to militancy in Central America. The Soviets
seek to maintain a degree of revolutionary momentum in the region, to
undermine US interests, and to keep the Atlantic Alliance embroiled
over how to deal with Soviet- and Cuban-sponsored instability and civil
war thrust on friendly governments in Central America.

oy a
Page-113
vet.

 

SEQRET
N§FORN

Several sources of domestic pressure and vulnerability in the Soviet
system could force difficult choices on the leaders in the 1980s. These
include deteriorating economic performance, a growing possibility of
social instability and internal dissidence, and a change in leadership.
None of these factors alone will necessarily alter Soviet behavior. Their
interaction could, however, lead to significant changes in foreign policy;
it certainly will make this policy less predictable.

Domestic Considerations

As the USSR begins its 11th Five-Year Plan, economic prospects
are gloomier than at any time since Stalin’s death, and there is a strong
possibility the economic situation will .get progressively worse in the
second half of the decade. Annual increments to national output even in
the early 1980s will be insufficient to avoid having to make choices
among the competing demands for investment, consumption, the cost of
empire, and continued growth in defense spending. As Soviet leaders
survey what they regard as a hostile external environment, however,
foreign policy and military requirements are likely to dominate their
policy calculations. They will therefore try to maintain high defense
spending, promote higher productivity and assure domestic control by
appeals to a more extréme patriotism, and, if social instability arising
from consumer dissatisfaction or ethnic tensions makes it necessary, by
resorting to repressive measures.*

It is difficult to assess what impact the forthcoming leadership
succession may have on Soviet policy, particularly since the environ-
ment in which a new top leadership has to act will probably be more
‘important than the individual views of its members. If the new leaders
believe the global “correlation of forces” to be favorable, especially if
they are less impressed than Brezhnev with US military might and more
impressed with their own, they might employ military power even
more assertively in pursuit of their global ambitions. Greater caution in
foreign policy could result, however, from the pinch of internal eco-
nomic difficulties and popular dissatisfaction. On balance, although the
policies of the new leadership cannot be confidently. predicted with any
precision, we believe that they will display general continuity with
those of the Brezhnev era.

* The Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury (National Security) notes that investment, labor,
and consumption shortfalls will still be likely, and believes that these will place constraints on major

Soviet foreign policy initiatives.
Page-114
DISCUSSION

THE CENTRAL ROLE OF SOVIET
MILITARY POWER

1. This Memorandum to Holders of NIE 11-4-78,
Soviet Coals and Expectations in the Global Power
Arena, focuses on those aspects of Soviet global
policy—particularly military power related—that we
believe to be of uppermost concern in the hierarchy of
Soviet foreign policy interests. The Memorandum af-
firms the central judgment of NIE 11-4-78—that So-
viet leaders regard military strength as the foundation
of the USSR’s status as a global superpower. We be-
lieve that Moscow perceives military power to be the
most critical factor underlying Soviet foreign policy.
In reaching and implementing foreign Dolicy de-
cisions, Soviet leaders, of course, consider a broadly
defined “correlation of forces” which includes not
only military, but political, social, and economic fac-
tors as well.

2 Since the mid-1970s the Soviet Union has dem-
onstrated a new willingness to challenge the West in
Third World settings as exemplified by its actions in
Angola and Ethiopia and its invasion of Afghanistan.
This more assertive international behavior has re-
flected a Soviet assessment of local opportunities and
the risks of Western counteraction, but it has been
strongly conditioned by the steady growth of Soviet
military strength and the confidence it engenders. This
Memorandum does not offer detailed analyses of So-
viet force posture or of Soviet policies in those areas
singled out for discussion. Rather, on a general level, it
seeks to identify incentives and objectives, as well as
potential vulnerabilities, which will shape Soviet poli-
aries over the next half decade.

3. This more assertive Soviet international behavior
likely to persist as long as the USSR Derceives that
Western strength is declining and as it further explores
the utility of its increased military Power as a means of
tealizing its global ambitions. Other sources of Soviet
influence @ comparatively weak, military might
and the provision of military assistance will remain the
key to the USSR’s international prospects.

 

4. The manipulation of the USSR's increased mili-
tary strength and capacity to provide military assist-

ance, however, will be Dragmatic and circumspect.
Soviet policymakers now confront unusually com-
blex issues: discontent among allies, the possibility
of a deepening military involvement in Afghani-
stan, a volatile situation involving Middle East cli-
ents, continued poor relations with China, and an
uncertain future for their relations with the West.
Where a palpable Soviet military preponderance
can be achieved, the Soviets will encourage regional
actors eventually to accommodate themselves to So-
viet regional objectives and seek security arrange-
ments based on Moscow's good will with attendant
political and military concessions, especially if the
alternatives of military self-help and countervailing
alliances prove less attractive. In East-West rela-
tions, the Soviets will continue to view the transla-
tion of military power into political gains as a long-
term process, best promoted by Dersistent
diplomatic efforts, covert action, and the steady
amassing of military strength designed to alter the
security environment gradually while avoiding con-
frontation. The Soviets will continue to act as
though detente does not oblige them to refrain from
assisting “legitimate” partners and “just™ causes in
Third World conflicts merely because US or West-
ern interests might be adversely affected.

5. As it enters the 1980s the current Soviet lead-
ership sees the heavy military investments made
during the last two decades paying off in the form
of unprecedentedly favorable advances across the
military spectrum, and over the long term in politi-
cal gains where military power or m tary assist-
ance has been the actual instrument of policy or the
decisive complement to Soviet diplomacy. The So-
viels credit their strategic programs of the 1970s
with lessening the probability of general nuclear
war with the United States and probably with
improving the war-fighting capabilities of their
forces. They probably believe that their strategic
forces would deter the United States from initiating
intercontinental nuclear war in circumstances short .
of a clear threat to US national survival. They prob-
ably see a high cisk of escalation to the nuclear level
in any conflict with the United States in areas (such
as Western Europe) perceived vital to US interests.

 

 

 

sofa
Page-115
6. There is an alternative view that the Soviets
eredit their strategic programs with improving
considerably their war-fighting and war-winning
capabilities during the 1970s. These programs con-
tinue to be undertaken with the key objective of
further improving these capabilities which the So-
viets believe are the only sound basis for forestalling
a nuclear war. The Soviets probably believe that the
maintenance of superior general purpose forces and
strategic nuclear forces will allow them to pursue an
assertive, expansionist foreign policy, and give them
increased confidence that Western military re~
sponses would be inhibited.*

7. The USSR's commitment to large military forces
and arms assistance will be maintained because:

— Political conflict involving force or conducted in
its shadow remains, in the Soviet view, a critical
factor driving both the internal developments of
states and the international system.

— The Soviets see their growing military strength
as providing a favorable backdrop for the con-
duct of an assertive foreign policy.

— Moscow perceives certain advantages in its
strategic nuclear capabilities. The Soviets will at-
tempt to exploit advantageous trends and ex-
pand their strategic nuclear capabilities to
counter new US programs.

— , The Soviets are confident that they possess mili-
“tary superiority against China, and are relatively
confident that they possess military superiority
in Europe; and they are determined to maintain
their lead.*

— Growing military aid has served as the main
conveyor of Soviet influence in the Third World.

* This view ts held by the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency,
and Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services,

* In Europe, Soviet superiority presupposes successful conduct of a
swiltly initiated offensive drive to the West that could, however, be
thwarted if it triggered large-scale NATO use of nuclear weapons,
or if it failed to achieve victory before NATO could bring its larger
economic and population resources to bear on the course of the war.
The Director, Buseau of Intelligence and Research, Department of
State, believes that, in assessing the balance in Europe, the Soviets
are very conservative tn their calculations and make @ number of
assumptions which highlight thelr own weaknesses and Western
strengths, While the Soviets recognize the value of their numerical
advantage in manpower and certain categories of weapons, they
are also aware of, and are attempting to remedy, weaknesses which
would make them far from confident of the outcome of a war with
NATO. As a result, future Soviet programs are likely to be more
strongly motivated than the text might suggest.

  

 

 

‘ORN

— Finally, in crises, military power is seen by the
Soviets as necessary for defending their interests
and for levering crisis solutions in directions
acceptable to them.

8. The momentum of programs already under way
and the Soviet leaders’ perception of actual and poten-
tial threats in the 1980s makes any letup in their ef-
forts unlikely. As they seek to achieve the military
objectives of superiority where possible, an assured de-
fense, and improved global reach, they perceive and
are concerned by: .

— Anewly assertive United States preparing to de-
velop and deploy significant new strategic sys-
tems, exploit new military technologies, and
field improved general purpose forces.

— Other foreign military programs, especially
within NATO, that threaten to undercut the
strengths of Soviet forces and exacerbate their
weaknesses.

— The possible development of a security/defense
relationship between the United States and
China.

— Instability on their southern border and the pros-
pect of an enhanced US military buildup in the
Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf region.

— Developments in Poland which, if allowed to
continue, could undermine Soviet hegemony not
only there but in the critical East European area
as a whole—but which could entail enormous
political, military, and economic costs to stop.

9. In an effort to meet the challenges the Soviet
leaders see looming, the new Five-Year Plan appar-
ently continues to accord the military first claim to
Soviet resources:

—.The number of Soviet weapon systems in
production and the production rates of major
‘weapons are continuing at high levels.

— The number of weapon systems in flight test and
trials—an indicator of the systems that are likely
to enter production in the next few years—also
remains at high levels.

— In addition, large numbers.of weapon systems
are in pretest stages of development; again,
the numbers are consistent with the level of
research and development (R&D) effort of the
past 20 years.
Page-116
SEQRET
NGFORN

— Capital construction is under way at a number
of key defense R&D facilities and production
plants in preparation for the development and
production of other new weapons, as well as for
the repair and overhaul of deployed systems.

— The addition of men to and the modernization
of equipment in the Soviet forces are continuing.

10. A central question for the 1980s is whether the
Soviets may be more inclined now than in earlier
periods to confront the United States in a crisis. Mos-
cow still views such a prospect as extremely hazardous.
However, in light of the change in the strategic balance
and continued expansion of general purpose forces, the
Soviets are now more prepared and may be more will-
ing to accept the risks of confrontation in the event of a
serious crisis, particularly in an area where they have
military or geopolitical advantages.

SOVIET RELATIONS WITH THE
UNITED STATES

11. More than five months into the Reagan admin-
istration, the Soviet leadership is still taking stock of
US policies and intentions. The Soviets may doubt that
the administration will actually be able to pursue as

. assertive a policy toward the USSR as it has suggested
it would. In their public commentary the Soviets con-
tinue to declare their commitment to “detente” and to
improving relations with the United States We be-
lieve that they see maintenance of such a relationship
as the most promising means of constraining US mili-
tary policies, of advancing their military and political
objectives, and of controlling the costs and risks of
heightened international tensions. Privately, the Soviet
leadership is probably reviewing its options in re-
sponding over the longer term to the possibility of
more assertive US policies.

12. In the military sphere the Soviets will attempt
to restrain a buildup in US strategic forces, and to pre-
serve or extend their margin of military advantage in
those areas where this is possible. They will seek to
engage the United States in arms control negotiations,
to appeal to US public opinion, and to increase pres-

 

*"Detente,” like the broader Soviet concept “peaceful coexis-
tence,” is a term that is often used or interpreted differently in the
West than in the USSR. While secking to ease tensions in its relation-
ship with the United States in order to gain economic, political, and
military benefits—both dicectly and in areas outside bilateral deal-
ings—the Soviets continue to pursue unremitting ideological and
“class” struggle in the international arena, including aid to “national
liberation” movements and anti-US regimes.

sures on the United States by the Allies. If the effort to
short-circuit the US buildup fails, the Soviets will
try—as they assert—to compete militarily however
high the costs. .But a major increase in defénse spend-

1 ing above that which the Soviets currently plan would
cut sharply into civilian programs with the attendant
possibility of substantial—and unpredictable—changes
in the domestic Soviet political environment.

13. Despite Moscow's’ expressions of hope that a
constructive relationship can be reestablished with the
present administration, the Soviets believe they could
be facing a more competitive and dangerous US oppo-
nent. They view the November election results and
evints, since then as evidence that the recent, anti-
Soviet evolution of US policy is part of a deeper trend
in American politics, and not merely a transient hard-
line swing in what they initially perceived as zig-zag
policies during the Carter administration.

14. The Soviet leadership sees the present US
administration as basically hostile to the USSR and
more prone to resist the USSR’s efforts to expand its
influence in the Third World. Moreover, it sees the
United States as intent upon linking Soviet behavior in
the Third World to East-West relations, particularly
arms control. Moscow has categorically rejected this
“linkage” and has reaffirmed its commitment to sup-
port “national liberation” movements. Nevertheless, it
still hopes to use detente and negotiations as means of
advancing Soviet interests, particularly by slowing
Western arms programs and regulating the US-Soviet
arms competition. Promoting detente is probably also
still seen in Moscow as increasing the likelihood of ad-
vantageous economic relations with the United States
and access to its technology and resources.

1S. Moscow will continue to stress ongoing arms
control and other security negotiations in its relation-
ship with the United States. The Soviets can be ex-
pected to negotiate to preserve their strategic options
in areas where they are strong and making progress,
and to reduce the chances that the United States and
its allies will use their-economic and technological
capabilities to turn the strategic balance against the
USSR.

16. In fact, the Soviets see prospects for the resus-
citation of Soviet-American relations as depending al-
most entirely in the near term on the fate of the arms
control dialogue with Washington. The Soviets prob-
ably doubt that the SALT II Treaty can be salvaged as
it stands. But they clearly wish to explore the possibil-
ity of reviving arms control negotiations with the

ser
Page-117
present administration. At any such meetings the
Soviets will attempt to discover how extensive US-
proposed revisions are. But they will not limit their
approach simply to responding to US proposals on var-
ious issues; rather, they will raise Issues of their own
choosing. .

17. The Soviets are wary of being drawn ‘into long
and inconclusive discussions about an appropriate
negotiating framework while the SALT Il Treaty re-
mains in limbo. They suspect that the present admin-
istration, with a strong defense mandate, might seek to
exploit a drawn-out arms control dialogue with the
Soviet Union to keep otherwise restive allies in line
and maintain pressure ‘on Moscow to observe treaty
constraints, while at the same time moving ahead
aggressively with a major military buildup. In this
connection they will closely monitor US activity in the
SALT and ABM fields and address their own force
Posture options.

 

18. If the USSR concludes that there is no prospect
in the near term for meaningful results from renewed
SALT, it may decide to go beyond the SALT II con-
straints. The Soviets could place ICBMs ‘with multiple
independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs) in
launchers of non-MIRVed ICBMs or increase the num-
ber of MIRVs per missile, thus increasing the threat to
US silo- and shelter-based ICBMs. The Soviets would
then seek to place the onus for failure on the United
States and to exploit the breakdown to widen cleavages
in-the Atlantic Alliance. At the same time, Moscow
would ‘continue to urge the United States to enter
SALT negotiations and would undoubtedly attempt to
manipulate West European commitment to SALT in
order to increase the pressure on Washington.

WESTERN EUROPE

19. The dominant view in Moscow is apparently
that the policies of the present administration in
Washington are likely to sharpen contradictions within
the Atlantic Alliance that can be exploited by the
USSR. As relations have cooled between the United
States and the USSR, the West Europeans have
adopted a damage-limiting strategy with respect to
their own ties with the Soviets. Thus, for example,
they have attempted to balance participation in US-
initiated sanctions in the wake of the Sovict invasion of
Afghanistan with efforts to keep the dialogue with
Moscow open and the prospect of improved ties intact.
Moscow has reciprocated, stressing the preeminent
importance of continuing detente in Europe, playing

especially on growing Soviet-European economic ties
and European domestic political. pressures which have
supported continuity and stability in relations with the
USSR. ‘The Soviets have traditionally sought to exploit
conflicts of interest between ite United States and
Europe, and Soviet policy has: attempted both to
stimulate such differences and to gain West European
support in modifying US policies.

20. Moscow regards the decisive factor in the US~
West European relationship as the continuing military
dependence of Western Europe on the United States
and its institutionalization in NATO. This reinforces
us political influence among: the NATO member
countries. ‘The Soviets, therefore, seek gradually to
convince the West Europeans that genuine security for
them cannot depend solely or even most importantly
on an Atlantic orientation, but rather should be guar-
anteed through additional security and arms control
arrangements with the USSR. Moscow believes US in-
fluence can be undermined to the extent that the
Soviet Union can:

— Undermine West European confidence in the
US nuclear “umbrella.”

— Erode the West European perception of the
Soviet threat.

— Engage the West Europeans in arms control
discussions and keep alive the prospects of their
success.

— Encourage West European economic depend-
ence on the USSR.

21. A number of developments cloud Soviet aspira-
tions toward Western Europe. NATO nations have
pursued—however fitfully—the US-sponsored Long-
Term Defense Program and have formally decided to
proceed with the deployment of a new generation of
US long-range theater nuclear forces (LRTNF) on the
continent. Moscow has come to regard these decisions
as representing a basic change in longstanding Western
attitudes. In the Soviet view, some Western govern-
ments are more aware of military imbalances such as
the Soviet preponderance in LRTNF. Western reac-
tions to the invasion of Afghanistan have heightened
Soviet concern, as has the stance of the present US
administration.

22. At the same time, however, the Soviets have
ample and growing evidence of West European
ambivalence about security relations with the United
States. They see and seek to capitalize on a lack of
Western consensus on major security issues—for exam-
Page-118
NGFORN

fev

ple, implementing the LRTNF decision and increasing
defense spending. They have been quick to seize on
the opportunities provided by increasingly vocal
political minorities in Western Europe who advocate
the easing of East-West tensions, and they have sought
to generate pressures on West European governments
to Influence Washington toward greater flexibility in
its dealings with the USSR. They will continue to act
politically to prevent LRTNF deployment through
arms control offers that would ratify Soviet military
advantages in Europe and through threats of
counterdeployments. In the process, Moscow seeks to
exploit differences in NATO with the objective of
blocking and changing US policies. .

23. Moscow recognizes that its ability to influence
developments in Western Europe depends upon
avoiding extreme East-West polarization. Sharply
heightened East-West tensions probably would drive
the West Europeans closer to the United States unless
they could be convinced that the United States was
responsible, and would limit Soviet ability to maneu-
ver Western Europe away from the United States.
Moscow, therefore, will seek to avoid a situation in
which the West Europeans would be confronted with
a choice between adherence to alliance policies or de-
tente with the USSR. Nevertheless, events of the past
several years suggest to the Soviets that they can pur-
sue certain economic and political interests with the
Europeans even if relations with the United States

~ deteriorate. Thus, “differentiated” detente has in-
creasingly emerged as a calculated Soviet strategy for
conducting East-West economic and political relations.

  

24. Moscow is keenly aware that Soviet intervention
in Poland would risk the political gains of detente with
the West Europeans and the possibility of a coopera-
tive relationship with the United States, including fur-
ther arms control negotiations and technology trans-
fers. The Soviets probably anticipate that even under
the most favorable intervention scenario the West

“European reaction would be harsh and comprehensive
and that a more or less unified US-West European
stand would initially be taken against them. They see
this as removing or reducing, at least’ temporarily,
what they would otherwise expect to be the restraining
influence of the European allies on the United States.
Nevertheless, the Soviets would expect that differences
between the United States and the European allies on
the scope, intensity, and duration of countermeasures
against the USSR would gradually emerge and provide
the USSR with opportunities for renewing detente
with Western Europe.

  

EASTERN EUROPE

25. An essential element contributing to an activist
Soviet policy toward Western Europe and, to same ex-

. tent, an assertive Soviet policy in other regions of the

globe, is a stable position in Eastern Europe. The
attention of the Soviet leadership is now focused on
the Polish crisis. A festering crisis in Poland, or an
intervention which involved a protracted period of
consolidation, would be a severe political and diplo-”
matic setback.

26. Over the years Moscow has attempted to estab-
lish limitations on social, economic, and political
experimentation in Eastern Europe. This has been suc-
cessful only in part, because each of the East European
states is beset by major economic and political prob-
lems that have a momentum of their own, and that
could mature into open crises, barring effective coun-
termeasures. These problems are longstanding but the
economic stagnation of recent years and economic as
well as political reverberations of Poland could exacer-
bate already existing sources of potential instability.
Thus the Soviets may have to devote increasing atter.-
tion to stabilizing East European regimes and main-
taining Soviet hegemony in the region. Yet the Soviet
ability to impose more restrictive international and
domestic policies on East European leaderships with-
out actual use of force is diminishing. How to balance
efforts by East European regimes to cope with their
own fundamental problems through measures likely to
Tun counter to Soviet interests, against the costs of re-
straining such measures, is the enduring problem of
Soviet policy toward Eastern Europe.

  

27. The Polish crisis has accentuated once again the
political vulnerability of the Communist regimes of
Eastern Europe. Poland’s agonies are an ominous re-
flection of chronic, systemic problems which afflict
the Soviet empire: low economic growth, declining la-
bor productivity, the need but increasing inability to
satisfy rising popular demand for consumer goods,
unsatisfactory responsiveness to guidance from Mos-
cow, and, not least of all, a dependence on trade and
credits from Western Europe. The USSR has many of
the same problems.

28. Poland presents the USSR with the most threat-
ening and complex challenge to its vital interests to
emerge -in Eastern Europe in the postwar period.
Soviet leaders are prepared to use military force to
preserve Soviet domination if they become convinced
that changes taking place in Poland jeopardize the
USSR's hegemony over Eastern Europe. However, be-

| f
Page-119
SE

29. Intervention in Poland by Soviet armed forces
most likely would exacerbate the military.“ conse-
quences of the Polish crisis for the Warsaw Pact. Re.
sistance to Soviet intervention by the Polish military
would lead to the destruction of the Polish forces in-
volved and result in sizable Soviet losses. Even if the
Polish military acquiesced to an intervention, enor-
mous damage to its morale and Popular support would
occur After the intervention, substantial Soviet forces
Permanently stationed in Poland,

for the lass of Polish forces to the
Pact and to guarantee internal order. If the Soviets

allow the Polish experiment to continue, they will try
to counter its effects on Warsaw Pact cohesion.

CHINA

30. The Soviets are deeply concerned by what they
Derceive as a quasi-alliance evolving between the
United States and China; yet they probably anticipate
few opportunities other than possibly the issue of
Taiwan for driving significant wedges between Wash-
ington and Beijing.

31. Until the end of the last decade, the Soviets

US-Chinese relations at the beginning of 1979, Mas-
Cow saw American inhibitions weaken and, after the

ment to ease restrictions on arms sales to China.

32. Soviet leaders now almost certainly find no
more reason than in the past to believe that their poli-
cies pursued toward China since the 1960s are likely to
lead to a normalization of Sino-Soviet relations suffi.
cient to relieve the USSR from the Dressures of Sino-

 

"We are unable to judge the precise limit of Soviet tolerance, and
we doubt that the Soviet leaders themselves have as yet determined
this limit. .

‘ORN-

American vcurity collaboration or the possibility of a
bwe-front war,

34. Sniet apprehension about China's: military
“ Eedential—ahich, despite its limited reach beyond
Chinese benders, includes a manpower advantage and
limited nuclear. capabilities—has found expression in
the steady Siviet buildup along the Sino-Soviet border
since the: mid-1960s. President Brezhnev and Defense
Minister Ustinov visited the Soviet Far East in April
J9TS. Subsequently, a high command in the Far East
was established, substantial changes were made in
command and control, and force modernization
continued. i

34. These improvements have not been a response
to any major new buildup of Chinese forces. The 1979
Sino-Vietramese war, however, reinforced Soviet
Perceptions of a need to continue them. From
Moscow's perspective Soviet forces are needed to con-
tain the Sino-Soviet conflict, ensure Soviet security
against China with a decisively superior posture, and
strengthen the Soviet hand in attempting to negotiate
some compromise with the Chinese. China's aspira-
tions to challenge the USSR suggest that the problem
and the concern—from a Soviet point of view—will
not disappear,

35. Against the background of intensified US pres-
Sures on Japan to assume a greater security role in
Northwest Asia, the Soviets perceive evolving Sino-
Japanese trade and political ties with increasing con-
cern. Moscow now views a US-Chinese military rela-
lionship directed against it, and indirectly supported
by Japan, asa plausible, midterm threat against which
it must plan. Soviet policies will seek to frustrate and
to delay the emergence of a “Washington-Beijing-
Tokyo axis” with links to NATO directed against Mos-
cow. However, to date Moscow has been unwilling to
make concessions to Tokyo on the most contentious
issuc, the Northern Territories, in order to improve
political and economic relations.

  

 

36. Over the past decade, Moscow's attempts to ex-
fend its influence in Indochina through close
Cooperation with Hanoi have been motivated by two
objectives: the reduction of US influence in the region
and the encirclement and neutralization of China.
Siuce the Sino-Vietnamese border war in 1979, Soviet
military aid to Vietnam has increased dramatically.
An enhanced Soviet military presence in or near the
country includes greater Soviet naval activity in the
southwest Pacific, Soviet naval docking rights, and
cegular Soviet intelligence flights from Vietnamese ter-

 

see
Page-120
SE
Ne

titory against China and US naval units in the western
Pacific and South China Sea. The Vietnamese remain
& cautious ally, wary of Moscow's embrace, but they

have nevertheless become a junior partner in the _

Soviet effort to

37. For years Moscow entertained some hope that
Mao's successor might be a pragmatic leader who
would see China's interests best served by abandoning
Mao's highly personalized and ideologically oriented
hostility toward the Soviet Union, and who would seek
2 more balanced Chinese relationship with the United
States and the Soviet Union. Deng and his colleagues
did dispense with much of the Maoist personalist
indictment of Moscow and its leaders, but in its place
have articulated a geopolitical rationale for opposing
the Soviet Union. Moreover, the Soviets see China's
commitment to long-term domestic modernization
Brograms as providing Chinese leaders with continu-
ing incentives for Dersisting in an anti-Soviet
course—at least as long as such Programs depend
heavily on extensive economic and technological assist-
ance from the West.

38. The Soviets may still hope that the US-Chinese
telationship will run afoul of domestic politics in one
or both countries. The present Soviet leadership devel-
oped the containment policy against China and built
the forces as well as the alliance and diplomatic frame-
work to support this policy. The current leaders are
unlikely to abandon this policy for the extreme alter-
natives of either far-reaching concessions to placate
Chinese demands or military measures to defeat or
coerce the Chinese leaders. Should present trends con-
linue, however, these drastic alternatives will remain
for consideration by a successor Soviet leadership.

block Chinese influence in the region.

THE THIRD WORLD *

39. Soviet strategic objectives in the Third World as
a whole will remain unchanged and will shape the
Soviet approach to particular regions. Most impor-
tantly, the Soviets believe that they have the legitimate

 

*The Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research; Depart-
ment of State, and the Special Assistant to the Secretary of the
Treasury (National Security) believe the Soviets will place greater
reliance on political means, subversion, and military assistance —at
opposed to the use of armed force—to undercut US policy, consoli-
date the USSR's position, encouroge greater accommodation from
regional powers, and gain wider acceptance of the legitimacy of
the Soviet role in Southwest Asia, than the text suggests. They also
believe the text underestimates the Soviet perception of the prob-
lems the USSR faces in that region (for example, in Iran, Iraq,
Pakistan, and Afghanistan).

 

T
‘ORN

right and the military strength to Dursue an aggressive
foreign policy in the Third World. In seeking to assert
the USSR’s status as a power with broad, global in-
terests, they will attempt to: 7

— Create as well as exploit opportunities stemming
from cegional conflicts to enlarge Soviet influ-
ence, using military assistance and Soviet mili-
tary power.

— Reduce Western—particularly US—influence
by expanding the USSR's presence and encour-
aging anti-Western regimes and elements.

— Augment Soviet strategic reach. and counter
Western military activity.

— Increase hard currency earnings as well as pro-
mote political and strategic interests through
arms sales.

Southwest Asia

40. During the past three years as a consequence of
the fall of the Shah, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
and the Iran-Iraq war, the poss ity of East-West
confrontation has sharply intensified in Southwest
Asia, an area immediately adjacent to the southern
borders of the USSR. Furthermore, although the
United States has only begun to develop a significant
military presence there, Washington has declared a
vital national interest in preserving the independence
of the Persian Culf region, raising the likelihood that
further Soviet expansion in that area will lead to con-
frontation. Soviet leaders are aware that the stakes,
risks, and consequences of US-Soviet contention in this
part of the world are great.

   
 

41. While the international reaction to the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan was probably more severe
than Moscow anticipated, the consequences of a fail-
ure to act are probably still viewed in Moscow as jus-
tifying the investment. Moreover, the Soviet leaders
almost certainly recognize that any further military
expansion by the USSR into the Persian Gulf region
would affect their relations with the West far more
adversely, and above all would carry far more serious
tisk—in comparison with the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan—of an escalating military confrontation
with the United States. Such considerations might not
deter the Soviet leaders if they were confronted by >
strategic opportunities or severe challenges in the Gulf
region. The threat of a US military presence in Iran, or
a call from an embattled leftist regime in Tehran, or

off i
Page-121
SE
Ne

 

invitation” from a local spinoff republic in [ran
might tempt the Soviets to introduce military forces.

42. Soviet behavior during the Iran-Iraq war and
the evolution of its diplomatic position on Gulf secu-
rity suggest that Moscow seems more immediately in-
terested in averting a major US military buildup in the
region and in advancing Soviet claims for Tecognition
as a legitimate coguarantor of Gulf security than in
tisking the employment of its military forces. The So-
viets have already begun to promote the idea of an
externally guaranteed _ international regime of
unimpeded access to the Gulf’s oil resources in which
the Soviet Union would be a legitimate and coequal
Darticipant and guarantor.

43. Moscow's policy in the Middle East is based on
certain broad goals. It seeks to:

— Preserve and exploit the strategic advantages it
holds by virtue of geography, potentially re-
inforced by the Soviet military presence in
Afghanistan, and by Soviet influence in Syria,
Libya, and South Yemen.

— Encourage a shift of Persian Gulf states from a
pro-Western to a more “nonaligned,” and even-
tually pro-Soviet position, while at the same time
helping “national liberation” movements that
might seize power in the Gulf. In this context the
Soviets also have attempted to improve relations
with the conservative, pro-Westem governments

.-in the Gulf region.

—— Improve Soviet access to and ultimately establish
control over Persian Gulf oil, with all that would
mean for enhanced Soviet leverage over West-
ern Europe and Japan.

44. In attempting to realize these objectives, Soviet
policymakers also have to take into account more fun-
damental concerns. First, they must approach with
care any move that could lead to a direct military
clash with the United States—especially one that they
could reasonably anticipate might escalate to nuclear
warfare. Second, they must assess the-impact of actions
in the Gulf on their own global strategic, political, and
economic interests, And, third, they must judge how
they wish to affect—and to be seen affecting—Culf oil
supplies to the West.

45. In light of the relative proximity of the Gulf to
home-based Soviet military power, demilitarization
schemes launched by Moscow to keep out external
forces are calculated to hinder Western activity and

et
FORN

Preserve Soviet military advantage. The Soviets may
believe there are good chances for consteai ing the
American military buildup in the tegion, given
Moscow's awareness of the unwillingness of Gulf states
to ally themselves openly with the United States or to
grant the United States more than conditional access to
some air and naval facilities, European skepticism
about the appropriateness or feasibility of the Ameri-
can defense design for the Persian Gulf, and some
domestic American criticism of the design as unwork-
able.

46. Moscow will work to encourage realignment to-
ward the USSR of Pakistani policies and the accept-
ance of such a change by the United States, Western
Europe, and China. Moscow will increase pressure on
Pakistan through military threats, border incidents,
subversion, and possibly strengthened ties with India
in an effort to persuade Islamabad to accommodate
Soviet objectives in Afghanistan.

47. Moscow's present goals in ATghanistan—not
easily realized—are to achieve political control and
military consolidation while avoiding the introduction
of major additional forces. The Soviets seek to establish
conditions for political domination and a continued
military presence in the country; the scale and nature
of any postinsurgency military presence will reflect
their broader regional objectives. The Soviets cannot
afford to withdraw substantial forces, even if they
thought such withdrawals would serve their interests
elsewhere. Nor would Moscow probably abandon
newly gained forward military positions even if secu-
rity conditions in Afghanistan permitted, although
small cosmetic withdrawals could be made for politi-
cal purposes.

48. With respect to Iran, Moscow will seek in the
near term to prevent any improvement in US-Iranian
relations and to influence the Khomeini succession ina
way. that might lead a follow-on regime to adopt a
Posture more favorable to Soviet interests. If they are
not propelled by events, the Soviets would probably
prefer a united, anti-Western Iran heavily subject to
Soviet influence and willing to barter oil on preferen-
tial terms for Soviet military and technical assistance.
Ifa leftist coalition were able to seize power, it might
request Soviet armed assistance in establishing its con-
trol in individual regions of Iran or throughout the
country. The Soviet decision to accept such an invita-
tion would be critically affected by Moscow's estimate
of the risk of a direct military confrontation with the
United States.

fn
Page-122
49. Moscow's ties with Iraq have been strained by
the Soviet refusal adequately to meet Iraqi military
resupply needs during the Iran-Iraq war. Baghdad is
already actively seeking Western sources of arms sup-
viy, and has been moving toward a closer alignment
with the conservative states in the region. The Soviets
will attempt to maintain Iraqi dependency onthe
USSR for arms supply. They also will hope that the
Dressure implicit in’ their relations with the forces
potentially threatening to the Saddam Hussein regime
(such as Syria and the Communist Party of Iraq) will
lead Iraq to respond to Soviet interest. They will cul-
tivate ties if feasible with pro-Soviet or anti-Hussein
elements in the Ba'th Party and military establish-
ment. They will seek an outcome of the current war
that leaves both Iraq and Iran dependent to some ex-
tent on the USSR, and that does not foreclose the possi-
ble further acquisition of oil from Iraq by the USSR
and other Soviet Bloc countries.

SO. In the future, a continued assertive Soviet pos-
ture in Southwest Asia is likely—one which seeks to
use Moscow's new forward position and regional in-
stabilities. The Afghanistan occupation has improved
the USSR’s military position vis-a-vis Iran and Pakistan
and has enhanced Soviet ability to exercise political
Dressure in the area. At the same time, it has ag-
gravated Soviet. difficulties with the regional states.
The Soviets will attempt to exploit this posture vigor-
ously once their political and military position in
Afghanistan has been consolidated. If the current So-
viet strategy fails—and particularly if the United
States seems likely to build a viable security frame-
work in the Gulf and to organize states in and close to
the region into an anti-Soviet front—Soviet behavior
will probably take a still more assertive turn. For the
present, however, Moscow seems to believe that the
USSR’s long-term interests are best served by averting
a US military buildup through preemptive diplomacy
rather than by confronting it prematurely with mili-
Aary displays. This relative restraint could, of course,

quickly give way if events in the region threaten So-

viet interests or create opportunities for them.

Africa

51. There will clearly be continuing opportunities
in Africa for the USSR and its proxies. The potential
openings are many:

— The political, economic, and social weaknesses
that will continue to afflict Africa.

 

— The tendency of African military organizations
to acquire as much weaponry as possible regard-
less of the real level of threat.

+ — Abiding African suspicions of Europe and the
United States.

~— The presence of apartheid in South Africa and

its impact on the domestic and foreign policies

of other countries in Africa. Clearly, the Soviets

view support for the African:struggle for major-

ity rule in Namibia and South Africa—in all of

its political, economic, military, and diplomatic

dimensions—as a key element in their approach
#to Sub-Saharan Africa over the next decade.

52. Of the many problems Soviet and Soviet proxy
actions in Africa may create for the United States in
the next several years, the most acute could be:

— A substantial increase in Soviet backing for or
involvement in the insurgency in Namibia.

— Extension of the USSR's influence elsewhere in
Sub-Saharan Africa by providing military
assistance—either directly or through the
Cubans—to Soviet clients in order to develop or
exploit internal instability in Zaire, Zambia, or
Zimbabwe, or by collaborating to further Libyan
aims in Chad and Sudan.

— Soviet provision of significantly larger numbers
of advisers and equipment, or more support for
the Cubans, in order to prop up Moscow-
oriented regimes in Angola, Mozambique, or
Ethiopia if they are threatened by dissident ele-
ments or faced by internal collapse.

— Military conflict between a Soviet client regime
and a third country—with or without Soviet
encouragement. (For example, Ethiopian en-
“croachment on Somalia, or—less likely—clashes
between Angola or Mozambique and South Af-
rica related to Namibia or bilateral disputes.)

— Soviet acquisition of a major new foothold in
West Africa.

-— An increased Soviet naval and air presence in
the region if the Soviets were successful in
obtaining access to port facilities and airfields in
various countries.

58. But increased Soviet activity in Sub-Saharan Af-
rica will not necessarily assure greatly heightened So-
viet influence. The Soviets are probably concerned
about the possibility of a peaceful Western-sponsored

a .
Page-123
SEGRET
NORN

Namibian settlement by their own failure to back the
right side in Zimbabwe, by US success in winning
Dermission to use military facilities in Somalia, Dji-
bouti, and Kenya, and by Nigeria's links with the
West. 7

Latin America

54. Moscow's interest in Latin America has intensi-
fied in recent years as it has seen a weakening of US
influence and new opportunities to promote Soviet
aims. The Soviets have exploited an intensified interest
by many Latin American nations in undertaking poli-
cies independent of the United States and their in-
creased willingness to develop political, economic, and
military ties with the USSR. Moscow also thinks that
political developments within many Latin American
countries favor Soviet interests.

55. One facet of Soviet strategy has been to develop
state-to-state relations with the region's major powers
such as Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. Although Mos-
cow hopes that over the longer run the environment in
these countries will be more hospitable to the growth
of Marxist and radical leftist. movements—and is
working overtly and covertly for such an eventuality—
at present it has put priority on cultivating nationalis-
tic and anti-US sentiments and promoting Soviet eco-
nomic interests, such as acquisition of Argentine grain.
Argentine grain.

56..In Central America in particular, however,
Moscow has taken a different tack and is seeking to
Dromote insurgencies aimed at bringing anti-US leftist
regimes to power. Inspired by the success of revolution
in Nicaragua in 1979, the USSR has detected potential
for revolution in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Hondu-
ras. The Soviets have moved to exploit these new revo-
lutionary currents by helping to consolidate the new
regime in Nicaragua, urging their local Communist al-
lies to participate and gain influence in broad-based
revolutionary movements, and extending military and
financial aid, both directly and through surrogates.

57. Cuba is an increasingly important outpost for’
Moscow in the hemisphere, as well as a surrogate in
the Middle East and Africa. The Soviets will continue
to use Cuban airfields and other facilities and to
underwrite the Cuban economy. Beginning in 1980,
the USSR has actively been encouraging and facilitat.
ing Castro’s return to militancy in Central America.
The Soviets seek to maintain a degree of revolutionary
momentum in the region, to undermine US interests,

-4 to keep the Atlantic Alliance embroiled over how

SE

 

to deal with Soviet and Cuban-sponsored instability
and civil war thrust on friendly governments in Cen-
tral America. .

58. Despite Moscow's new activism in the region,
some significant constraints on Soviet activity are
likely to remain. Moscow recognizes that, compared to
the Middle East and South Asia, Latin America is not
central to its security concerns. The Soviets fecognize
that the United States has the ability to exert substan-
tial military and economic power in the region and
that Soviet ability in this regard is limited. Moreover,
Moscow realizes that, as in the case of Jamaica where
it suffered a serious reversal, its influence sometimes
rests on shaky domestic foundations. Despite these fac-
tors, it is clear that the United States will be faced with
more Soviet support for political subversion and mili-
tary activity in the Western Hemisphere in the 1980s
than it faced in the preceding decade.

DOMESTIC PRESSURES AND POSSIBLE
POLICY CHANGES

59. Several sources of domestic pressure and vulner-
ability in the Soviet system could force difficult
choices on the leaders in the 1980s. These include
deteriorating economic performance, a growing pos-
sibility of social instability and internal dissidence, and
a change in leadership. None of these factors alone will
necessarily alter Soviet behavior, but their interaction
could lead to significant changes in foreign policy. The
Soviet Union of the 1980s will probably be a more
volatile society, and its policies (and reactions to US
policies) may be less predictable than in the past.

Economic Problems

60. As the USSR begins its 11th Five-Year Plan,
economic prospects are gloomier and policy choices
more difficult than at any time since Stalin's death
Shortfalls in industrial production and back-to-back
harvest failures have reduced the growth in gross na-
tional product (GNP) during the Past two years to its
lowest rate since World War Il and have left the lead-
ership looking for ways to alleviate economic Dressures
at home without affecting defense, weakening politi-
cal-control, or generating unrest in Eastern Europe.

61. The economic situation will be poor in the
1981-85 period. There is a strong possib ity it will get
Drogressively worse and become a more critical factor
in the second half of the decade. Soviet economic
problems cannot be easily overcome. Annual incre-

i
Page-124
SEQRET

ments to national output even in the early 1980s will
be too small to permit all of the following simul-
taneously:

Steeply rising investment in energy develop-
ment. .

The increases in investment in industry, agricul-
ture, and transportation needed to tevive the
economy.

Greater support to Eastern Europe and client
states elsewhere.

Any substantial increase in consumer welfare.

And continued growth in defense spending at
the rates of the past (about 4 percent Der year on
average since 1970).

62. If military spending continues to grow at 4
Percent per year, its share of Soviet economic output
could increase from about one-eighth now to over one-
sixth in 1990. More importantly, the military share of
the annual increment to economic output—the addi-
tional amount that can be distributed each year to ease
the political tensions that arise from competition for
resources—could increase from about one-fifth to as
much as three-fourths. This would drastically reduce
the ability of the Soviet leaders to allocate additional
Tesources to investment and consumption.

63. The projection of Soviet military spending most
consistent with available evidence suggests that pres-
sures in:favor of continuing the existing arms buildup
are likely to offset any inclination toward change that
might arise from the leadership's growing economic
concerns. Under conditions of heightened interna-
tional tension, the Soviets might even be willing to in-
crease defense spending more rapidly despite the
negative impact this would have on investment and
consumption. In any case, Soviet leaders are highly
unlikely for economic reasons alone to accept con-
straints on defense programs that they consider vital to
their national security, However, Soviet incentives to
constrain US military programs through arms control
Negotiations will increase as the economy slaws in the
1980s, particularly if economic difficulties threaten to
Cause serious domestic instability.

64. The Soviet leaders also face rising costs asso-
ciated with supporting the USSR’s Communist allies.*

 

* The figures in this paragraph take into account Eastern Europe
(Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland. and
Romania). Cuba, Vietnam, Mongolia, North Korea, and Afghan:
istan.

 

FORN

Last year, the value of this assistance in current dollars
totaled an estimated $23 billion, a manifold increase
from the early 1970s. These costs now equal total So-
wiet hard’ currency export earnings, Although the bill
for trade subsidies is likely to decline as the Soviets
narrow the gap between their export prices and world
Drices and as oil sales stagnate, other Cost increases are
likely to more than offset this factor. For example,
Door economic prospects in Cuba and Vietnam and
declining growth in East European countries will add
to this Soviet economic burden. Poland especially will
be a large drain.

§5. The Soviets are willing to sacrifice the benefits
of foreign trade for what they berceive as overriding
political or military goals Nevertheless, Moscow
wishes to expand its trade links with the West, includ-
ing the United States. Despite public statements to the
contrary, Moscow needs, more than ever, access to
Western grain, equipment, and technology, the last
particularly to enhance priority military research and
development programs. In the absence of their own
military intervention in Poland or some other action
that would cause new Western trade strictures, they
are relatively optimistic that they can acquire needed
imports from Western Europe and Japan even if the
United States limits its own trade and urges its allies to
do likewise,

Potential Social Instability

66. Little real growth in consumption is likely in
the years ahead as defense claims a larger share of
GNP and investment is skewed more to heavy indus-
try. Patience on the part of the Soviet Population, now
more preoccupied with food shortages than with any
other domestic problem and less willing to defer ma-
terial satisfactions, could wear thin. This unsatisfied
consumer demand undercuts regime efforts to moti-
vate workers to increase efficiency and productivity
throughout the economy, and it could even spawn so-
cial instability.

67. The Soviet leadership is aware of these prob-
lems, and of the pressures they create to allocate a
Breater share of output to consumption at the expense
of investment or military spending. Foreign policy and
military requirements will dominate the calculations
of Soviet leaders, however, as they survey what they
tegard as hostile external forces (especially the United
States and China). They are thus likely to try to pro-
mote higher productivity, maintain high defense
spending, and assure domestic control by appealing to
Page-125
SE

T

NgFoRN

& more extreme patriotism and, if necessary, by resort-
ing to repressive measures."*

68. Another possible source of social instability in
the 1980s is unrest among the non-Russian nationalities
of the USSR. Rising expectations among minority
populations could make it more difficult to assure eth-
nic cohesion in the Soviet multinational empire over
the long term. A particular problem is posed by the
higher growth of the population in the Muslim regions
of the USSR. The possibility of greater self-assertive-
ness of these peoples, if combined with spillover ef-
fects of resurgent Islamic fundamentalism in [ran and
elsewhere in the Middle East, could present the Soviet
regime with a potentially serious, but manageable
challenge.

Political Leadership and Succession

69. It is difficult to assess what impact the forth-
coming leadership succession may have on Soviet
policy, particularly because the environment in which
a new top leadership has to act will probably be more
important than the individual views ofits members.
Political conflict within the leadership is likely to mark

 

‘* The Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury (Na-
tional Security) notes that incestment, labor, and consumption
shortfalls will still be likely, and believes that these will place con-
straints on major Soviet foreign policy initiatives.

the succession period, with no single leader becoming
clearly preeminent for at least several years. In fact,
the possibility of a two-stage succession, with a new
Beneration of leaders displacing the current geron-
tocracy only in the second stage, could extend the pe-
tiod of political maneuvering into the latter part of the
decade.

70. These conditions, and their conjunction with in-
creasingly difficult choices in economic Dolicy, do not
indicate clearly any one particular direction for future
Soviet foreign policy. If the new leaders believe the
slobal “correlation of forces” to be favorable, espe-
cially if they are less impressed than Brezhnev with US
military might and more impressed with their own,
they might employ military power even more asser-
tively in pursuit of their global ambitions. Greater cau-
tion in foreign policy could result, however, from the
pinch of internal economic difficulties and popular
dissatisfaction. On balance, we believe the policies of
the new leadership will display general continuity
with those of the Brezhnev era—military force im-
Provements, a mix of detente and challenge in East-
West relations, containment of China, and assertive
behavior in the Third World. But, in view of the re-
markable continuity of policies and bersonnel under
Brezhnev, the generational nature of the turnover
after his departure, and likely economic circum-
stances—Soviet policy during the period of leadership
succession in the 1980s will be less predictable.
Page-126
SEQRET
NGFORN

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

 

9. Director of tatelligence and Research, for the Department of Stote

. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of Defense
nd the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

¢. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, for the Deportment of the Army

d. Director of Navol latelligence, for the Deportment of the Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, latelligence, for the Department of the Air Force

f

9

o

- Director of Intelligence, for Headquarters, Marine Corps

}. Deputy Assistant Secretory for International tatelligence Analysis, for the Depart-
meant of Energy

- Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of lavestigation

. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

|- Special Assistant to the Secretary for Notional Security, for the Deportment of the
Treasury

rs

k. The Deputy Director for National Foreign Assessment for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordonce with opplicoble
Security regulations, or returned to the National Foreign Assessment Center,

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it for «
period not in excess of one yeor. At the end of this period, the document should be destroye
or returned to the forwarding ogency, or permission should be requested of the forwardic
ogency to retain it in accordance with 1AC-0-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used seporotely from the text is Unclassified.

*SPORET
Page-127
