
Page-1
*)

 

NIE 11-6-67
x HFROLEED™ DISSEN Ee T June 1967

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-6-67

Soviet Strategy and Intentions in the
Mediterranean Basin

rel REVIEW PRO
Cn TEE. AS SANITIZED

eltbedaanuassnenaenenn te
Submitted by

aha dete aesenane

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf

1 June 1967

Authenticated:

SUTIVE SECRETARY, YSIB

ser N° 480
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA

Concurring:

Vice Adm, Rufus L. Taylor, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

Mr. George C. Denney, Jr., for the Director of intelligence and Research, Depart.
ment of State

Ut. Gen, Joseph F. Carroll, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
ut. Gen. Marshall S. Carter, the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. William ©. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

   
 

This material contains information affecting National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage lows, , USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any unauthorized person is prohibited,
Page-3
NOTE
1 June 1967

NIE 11-6-67: SOVIET STRATEGY AND INTENTIONS IN THE
MEDITERRANEAN BASIN

This estimate has been under preparation for some months, and responds to
a request for a treatment of long-term Soviet plans and intentions in areas sur-
rounding the Mediterranean and Red Sea Basins. The paper does not deal,
therefore, with the immediate tactical considerations which underlie Soviet policy
in the current Middle East crisis, though Soviet conduct has been compatible
with the longer-range view of Soviet aims described here.

sSeeRe
Page-4
CONTENTS
Page
CONCLUSIONS 1.00.12 e eens 1
DISCUSSION .... 2.00... cece eee eect eee tec e eee e eee e eee 3
I. INTRODUCTION ....... 2... e cece eee e eee teen tenes 3

I. SOVIET ECONOMIC, POLITICAL, AND MILITARY ACTIVITIES .. 4

 
 
 
 
 

A. Eastern Mediterranean and Red Sea Areas .. 4
B. North Africa .......... 00... eee e cece eee 6
C. Greece, Turkey, and Cyprus .......... 6
D. Soviet Relations With European States Having Mediterranean
Interests ........ - 7
E. The Soviet Naval Presence 8
Ill. AIMS OF SOVIET POLICY IN THE REGION ..................-- 10
IV. AN APPRAISAL OF THE FUTURE THREAT TO WESTERN IN-
TERESTS oo... 2. cece cece e eet eneaeees 13

ANNEX
Page-5
es

ATLANTIC

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

   
 
   
 

‘Mogadiscio

MOT NECESSARILY: AUTHORITATIVE
Page-6
SOVIET STRATEGY AND INTENTIONS
IN THE MEDITERRANEAN BASIN

CONCLUSIONS

A. Over the last decade or so, the USSR has gradually built up a
position of major influence in the areas surrounding the Mediterranean
and Red Sea Basins. As the role and influence of the Western colonial
powers have declined, a number of states in the region have increas-
ingly looked to the USSR as their preferred great power supporter.
Military and economic aid, expanding trade, extensive diplomatic
activity, and anti-Western propaganda have been, the principal in-
struments of Soviet policy. In addition, Soviet influence among Arab
nations has been facilitated by Moscow’s consistent support for their
claims against Israel.

B. Soviet policy aims at exploiting radical nationalist and anti-
Westem political forces in order to deny the region to Westem in-
terests of every sort—political, economic, and military. It reflects
the broad strategy conception which currently guides Soviet action
throughout the Third World, that is, that an alliance can be formed
between the “socialist camp” and a broad front of revolutionary forces
to constrict and weaken the world position of the Western Powers.
In this Soviet perspective, the Mediterranean and Red Sea Basins
retain their historic importance as areas where Western interests are
deeply engaged and through which influence can be exercised farther
afield in Africa and Asia.

C. For the last several years, the USSR has snaintained a modest
naval force in the Mediterranean on a continuing basis. With its
present size and capabilities, it poses no serious threat to US or NATO
naval forces. The primary purpose of the Soviet naval presence is
apparently less military than political-psychological: to convey that

—SEEREF--. - ey
Page-7
SECRET

the Mediterranean is not an “American lake.” In the event of general
hostilities, of course, this force would seek to attack US aircraft carriers.

D. We do not believe that the Soviets aim to acquire military posi-
tions or assets of their own in the area which would be significant in
connection with a general war. Should they eventually adopt a policy
of involvement in limited conflicts throughout the region, they would
need to acquire capabilities of a kind they do not now possess, and
they would presumably also want air and naval facilities at some points
within the Mediterranean Basin itself. They would probably not
think it politically feasible or desirable, however, to acquire bases at
a time when widespread anticolonialist pressures are persuading the
Western Powers to eliminate their own bases in the area.

E. Insofar as the Soviets have a military interest in the area, this
seems likely for the foreseeable future to have two aspects. The first
is to influence the political disposition of governments in such a way
as to make the area as inhospitable as possible to military cooperation
with the West, and in particular, to the deployment of US military
power. The second is to establish relations with governments which
make it possible to use them as proxies for actions directed against
Western interests and against regimes unfriendly to the Soviet Bloc.

F. The number and variety of conflict situations which are likely
to develop within the area, and between forces there and Western
states, will give the Soviets numerous openings in the years ahead
for applying such a policy of intervention by proxy. Since the USSR
will wish to avoid becoming directly involved in military adventures
undertaken by its political clients, however, it will try to keep tensions
between the Western Powers and the states of the region at a high
but not critical level.. In such an atmosphere Soviet political oppor-
tunities will be maximized and actual risks minimized.
Page-8
DISCUSSION

1, INTRODUCTION

1. Political and power relationships in the Mediterranean and adjacent areas
have been transformed since 1945. In the postwar period the Western Euro-
pean colonial powers lacked the strength and the will to restore the dominant
position they had long held. The movement for national independence was
successful throughout the region and brought new political forces into play.
The US became a major factor in consequence of its postwar role as a world
power, its aid programs, private investments, and naval presence. And, since
the mid-1950’s, the USSR has extended its activities and influence to the area
on a considerable scale.

2. With the failure of its pressures on Iran and Turkey and the collapse of
the Communist effort in Greece in the early postwar years, the USSR’s interest
in the Mediterranean area had appeared to decline. Stalin gave priority to
consolidating Communist power in Easter and Central Europe, Soviet re-
sources were strained by the effort of postwar recovery, and Moscow evidently
underestimated the scope and significance of the movements against Western
colonialism in Asia and Africa. After Stalin’s death, however, the Soviet leader-
ship radically altered its view of developments in the Afro-Asian world. Recog-
nizing the limited prospects of native Communists, the USSR abandoned the
policy of supporting only ideological clients. It began to associate itself with
newly independent governments and nationalist movements, offering support
and cooperation on the basis of a common interest in “anti-imperialist” policies.

3. In the area discussed in this paper, the new Soviet approach found its
first significant opportunity in 1955 when the Soviet Bloc began its activity as
a supplier of arms to certain states. Since then the USSR and other Bloc states
have elaborated their ties with most of the countries in the Mediterranean and
areas adjacent to it. The main reliance has been on conventional instruments
of influence—military and economic aid, trade, an active diplomacy including
numerous exchanges of ceremonial visits, cooperation in the UN, and propa-
ganda. Subversive techniques and intelligence operations are, of course, every-
where part of the modus operandi of Soviet policy, though in these areas they
are now being applied primarily to advance the USSR’s relations with local
governments rather than to win power for Communist parties.? The result has
been that the USSR has become an important factor in the region, a major
influence on governments and political forces there. This paper examines the
extent and significance of these developments, the aims of Soviet policy in the
area, and the nature of future threats to Western interests which may result.

* The areas under discussion in this paper are indicated on the map opposite page 1.

* See SNIE 10-2-65, “Soviet and Chinese Communist Strategy and Tactics in North Africa,
the Middle East, and South Asia,” dated 15 July 1965, SECRET. The discussion in para-
graphs 9-32 of the instruments of Soviet policy remains valid.

SECRET -. - ote 3
Page-9
SECRET

1. SOVIET ECONOMIC, POLITICAL, AND MILITARY ACTIVITIES

4. In the past dozen years, the influence of the USSR and its allies has made
itself felt in the area in a variety of ways. Probably the most important single
instrument of policy has been the supplying of military aid, but there has also
been a significant quantity of economic aid, trade with the Soviet Bloc has
grown substantially, and in recent years Soviet military power has been present
in the regular maintenance of a modest naval force in the Mediterranean.*
And Soviet diplomacy and propaganda have attempted to establish an align-
ment in world politics between the “socialist camp” and states of the region
on the basis of a common opposition to “Western imperialism.”

A. Eastern Mediterranean and Red Sea Areas

5. The USSR’s initial move into this area was its $265 million arms agree-
ment with Egypt, announced in September 1955, under the cover of an
Egyptian-Czech deal. Since then, the UAR, Syria, Iraq, and Yemen have
received about $2.1 billion worth of military equipment from the Soviet Union
and its East European allies. In Yemen, the Soviets initially dealt with a tra-
ditional despot; the other three recipients have been leftwing governments
dominated by military men. All four recipients were hostile to UK and US
defense pacts and bases in the region. Today, the military forces of the UAR,
‘Syria, and Yemen are equipped almost entirely with Communist arms. Only
Iraq continues to make significant purchases from Wester sources. In suc-
cessive agreements, Moscow has supplied more and more up-to-date equipment;
countries in this area have usually been the first non-Communist recipients of
such Soviet materiel. Extensive training both in the USSR and in recipient
countries has been an integral part of Soviet military assistance programs.

6. Economic relations have been less one-sided. In the region as a whole,
however, the USSR has succeeded in obtaining a significant share in a trading
area long dominated by European and American commercial interests. The
four major recipients of military aid have also gotten the vast bulk of Soviet
and East European economic aid to the area. Yet, even in the UAR, economic
assistance from Western sources has until recently outweighed that from the
USSR and Communist countries combined. With the recent cessation of US
PL-480 aid and cutbacks from European sources in consequence of Cairo’s
failure to pay its debts, the USSR has become the major source of foreign aid
to the UAR. Trade with Communist countries increased from less than 10 per-
cent of the UAR’s total trade in 1954 to nearly 40 percent in 1966.

7. In Iraq, hard currency oil receipts have contributed far more to national

- revenues than has Soviet economic aid. In anti-Westem Syria, the USSR has

been one of the chief sources of economic aid; some $230 million has been ex-
tended, half in 1966 for a massive dam and irrigation project on the Euphrates,
plus another $140 million from Eastern Europe. In Yemen, Soviet aid has far

‘Tables showing military and economic aid supplied to states of the region appear in
the Annex.

4 SEGRE
Page-10
—SEERET—

outweighed that from other sources, although apparently a significant part of
this aid is being channelled through the UAR.

8. Middle Eastern countries have been eager to engage in programs which
conserve water and improve agriculture; the USSR has taken on the Aswan
High Dam project in Egypt and the Euphrates project in Syria and has also
assisted in a wide variety of irrigation and land reclamation schemes. It has
undertaken major railroad building in Iraq and Syria, and port construction or
maritime projects in Yemen, the UAR, and Iraq. It has encouraged fisheries
and assisted in setting up food processing plants in the UAR, Sudan, and Yemen,
as well as further south in Somalia. While the USSR has by no means replaced
the West in development activity, its role in this field has helped to change
attitudes. Such “normal” activity has resulted in acceptance of the USSR as a
responsible partner in development programs, and has helped to diminish
earlier fears that Moscow's only aim was to impose communism.

9. Political relations between the Eastem Arab states and the Soviet Union
vary widely. At one end of the spectrum, Saudi Arabia has no relations with
the USSR; Sudan, Jordan, Lebanon, ‘and Kuwait have modest trading relation-
ships; Sudan gets a small amount of economic aid. Iraq seeks to follow a
middle course between the USSR and the West. Syria, under its present extreme
Baathist leaders, has moved fairly close to the USSR; it tolerates the local Com-
munist Party, has at least one Communist in the Cabinet, and is seeking to
establish party-to-party relations with the CPSU and the Yugoslav League of
Communists. It is vigorously anti-US on most foreign policy issues and appears
content to leave a large part of its trade and virtually all of its development pro-
gram in Soviet or other Communist hands. Support for Arab claims against
Israel has been a principal device employed by the Soviets to spread their in-
fluence among all the Arabs.‘

10. Closest in relations with the Soviet Union is the UAR, which the USSR
categorizes as a “revolutionary democracy” in the process of building socialism.
The CPSU has encouraged the Communist Party in Egypt to dissolve itself as
an overt organization and has advised its members to join the sole legal politi-
cal organization, the Arab Socialist Union. Egyptian foreign policies, particu-
larly in the Arab states and Africa, are largely congruent with those of the
USSR; both countries wish to see a reduction of Western military and economic
positions. There are, however, certain limits to the UAR’s intimacy with the
Soviet Union because of efforts by each side to use the other for its own pur-
poses. Nasser retains his independence and his dreams of Egyptian leadership
in pan-Arabia, and evidently realizes that Moscow's long-range plans are not
identical with his own. Perhaps more important, Cairo continues to eam most
of the foreign exchange it needs to run its industry and buy its food from West-
em sources—tourism, the Suez Canal, and cotton sales—and it still looks pri-
marily to Western companies to find and produce its oil.

‘The Soviet attitude toward the Arab-Israeli dispute is discussed in Section IV of NIE
30-67, “The Arab-Israeli Dispute: Current Phase,” dated 13 April 1967, SECRET.

“SEGRE 2. eon. §
Page-11
—SEERET-

11. In the southern portion of the Red Sea Basin, Yemen and Somalia have
cordial relations with the USSR, which is their major source of military and
economic assistance. Opportunities have been less favorable for the Soviets
in neighboring countries; Ethiopia and Saudi Arabia are closely tied to the US,
and the Sudan is largely uninterested in affairs beyond its own borders. In
Yemen, the USSR provided substantial military assistance to the archaic regime
of the Iman in 1958-1959 and continued this with the Yemeni Republic under
UAR domination. Soviet economic and military aid has helped to sustain the
Egyptian military effort in Yemen. The Soviets support Egyptian efforts to
eliminate British influence from South Arabia. This backing is in line with

. Seneral Soviet tactics of pursuing Soviet aims through local forces already com-
mitted to an anti-Western course. Soviet activities in Somalia also reflect op-
portunistic sponsorship of anti-Westem forces, but this enterprise has involved
a certain cost. By supporting and arming Somalia, the Soviets have aroused
fear and hostility in Ethiopia and Kenya, the two most important East African
states; aid offers to them do not appear to have offset these effects.®

B. North Africa

12. Opportunity has not knocked as often for the Soviets in North Africa as
it has farther east. The rulers of Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia have not seen their
interests served by close ties with the USSR and have confined relations to
limited «rade and aid. Several years ago Morocco obtained a squadron of
fighter aircraft from the USSR, and it has recently contracted for $2 million
worth of spares and ammunition. Both it and Tunisia have agreed to take
moderate amounts of economic aid from Communist countries. But the regimes
of all three countries maintain close political and economic ties with the US
and France or Britain.

13. Algeria has maintained fairly close relations with the USSR since it gained
its independence from France in 1962. Relations cooled for a time after Ben
Bella’s removal, but his successor, Boumediene, although departing from Ben
Bella’s conspicuously pro-Soviet domestic and foreign policy line, wanted to
retain Soviet military and economic aid. The USSR decided to adapt, and
subsequently moved ahead with military aid, which now totals about $210 mil-
lion. The Soviets have developed extensive access to the Algerian military
establishment through their aid and training program, although they do not
now exercise a significant influence in internal economic or political affairs.
More recently, there have been signs that the Algerian regime is renewing its
support for national revolutionary movements abroad, especially in Africa. The
Soviets will, of course, encourage this.

C. Greece, Turkey, and Cyprus

14. The Soviet task in developing relations with these countries differs in
many ways from that in dealing with the Arab states. As NATO members,

“Soviet interests and actions in the Red Sea are also discussed in NIE 75/76-67, “Prospects
in the Hom of Africa,” dated 27 April 1967, SECRET.

6 —SEEREF- -
Page-12
~SEEREF-

Greece and Turkey are allied with the West, to which they look for military
aid and support and for economic assistance. Turkey controls the sea route from
Russia's southern coast to the Mediterranean and has been hostile to the south-
ward expansion of Russian power. In line with Moscow's “Good Neighbor
Policy” directed toward nations along its southern borders, the Soviet Union has
embarked on a persistent and patient effort to improve relations with Turkey.
The Soviets have recently begun a small program of economic assistance and
made efforts to exploit §rowing Turkish distaste for the large US military pres-
ence. Although the Turkish Communist movement is insignificant, a newly
emergent left is articulating anti-American feelings with increasing impact.

15. Prior to the April 1967 coup, Soviet relations with Greece had improved.
The USSR and other Communist states had been accommodating in arranging
barter deals for Greek agricultural products for which there was no ready
market. The Greek Communist front party (EDA) held a bloc of 22 seats
out of 300 in Parliament. But the April coup brought into power a military
regime with strong anti-Communist feelings. Soviet propaganda labels it as
fascist and the creature of the US. For the present, the Soviets will have no
direct dealings with Greece. They will hope that intemal opposition to the
military regime will promote cooperation of the non-Communist left with the
Greek Communists, a situation which could give Soviet policy new opportunities
if and when the military regime: collapses. :

16. Cyprus has offered much Greater opportunities for Soviet intrusion than
either of its parent countries. The Soviets moved to support Archbishop Ma-
Karios in his efforts to assert Greek Cypriot hegemony over the island in 1964
by providing sizable amounts of arms. But this policy interfered with Soviet
efforts to improve its relations with Turkey, and, for the past year or so, the
USSR has followed a more even-handed line between Greek and Turkish inter-
ests on Cyprus. This has damaged the Position of the large Cypriot Commu-
nist Party, and cooled Soviet state relations with Cyprus as well. Now, Soviet
policy toward Cyprus revolves around three basic aims: to maintain Cyprus
as a sovereign state, to secure the withdrawal of British bases from the island,
and simultaneously to keep open the possibility of advancing relations with both
Greece and Turkey. Progress in the attainment of these goals would in addi-
tion erode NATO's position in the eastern Mediterranean.

D. Soyiet Relations With European States Having Mediterranean Interests

17. The existence of two Communist states on the Mediterranean, Albania
and Yugoslavia, does not at present have much significance for Soviet activities
in the area. Conceivably a political change in Albania could some day restore
that country’s relations -with the USSR, however, and Bive the Soviets renewed
access to naval facilities. Political trends in Yugoslavia indicate that Belgrade
will continue to pursue independent policies, despite intermittent efforts in recent
years to improve relations with Moscow. There is, of course, a certain paral-
Ielism between Yugoslav and Soviet influence on other states of the region, since
Page-13
~SEERET—

Belgrade also talks the language of revolutionary socialism and anti-imperialism
and shares Soviet views on many international issues. Nevertheless, Yugoslavia
has no policy of deliberate cooperation with the USSR to increase the latter's
influence in the Mediterranean. It would prefer, in fact, to see both Soviet
and American influence reduced. Generally, Belgrade would like the states
of the region to follow the principles of nonalignment, in which case it would
expect to play a more prominent role itself.

18,

J

E. The Soviet Naval Presence

20. The Soviet Union first undertook modest naval operations in the Medi-
terranean in 1954. By 1960, with the establishment of a base at Vlone Bay
on the Albanian coast of the Adriatic, the USSR was maintaining a force of 12
“W” class submarines in Mediterranean waters. When Soviet-Albanian dis-
sension forced the Soviets to withdraw from the base in 1961, the USSR left
4 of these submarines with the Albanians and withdrew the rest to Soviet
ports. Except for occasional submarine patrols and cruises by 1 or 2 ELINT
ships, a hydrographic vessel, and a supporting oiler, the Soviet Naval presence
in the Mediterranean virtually disappeared.

8 “SECRET- .
Page-14
—SECREF

21. The Soviets reestablished a visible presence in the Mediterranean in the
summer of 1964 with the dispatch of a cruiser-destroyer force from the Black
Sea Fleet and the institution of virtually continuous submarine patrols. The
pace of operations doubled in 1965 and again in 1966, reaching a high point
in June 1966 when a force of 20 ships—6 submarines, a cruiser, 4 guided missile
destroyers, a modified KOTLIN class destroyer, 2 minesweepers, 2 escorts, 3
oilers, and an oceangoing rescue tug—were active in Mediterranean waters. For
the last two years, normal Soviet deployment in the Mediterranean has consisted
of about 10 surface ships (2 or 3 major combatants, 2 small combatants, 2 or 3
hydrographic vessels, and 3 support ships) and from 1 to 4 submarines. These
ships are drawn from all three Western fleets.

22. The Soviet “combined naval squadron” in the Mediterranean has not
engaged in heavy tactical exercise schedules. Surface forces have spent about
half their time at anchor in one of five offshore anchorages (in the Gulf of
Hammamet off the Tunisian coast, in the vicinity of Malta, in the Gulf of Sirte
on the Libyan coast, in the vicinity of Kithira Island, and off the eastern coast
of Crete) and about a third of their time in routine transits to and from an-
chorages and in surveillance of NATO operations. The remaining time has been
spent in operations of which we know little but which we believe are primarily
individual ship exercises. There appears to have been little underway training

~ or replenishment and very few ASW exercises. Usually, multiship tactical exer-
cises have ‘been conducted only during transits between anchorage areas; little
is known about Soviet submarine operations. The presence of Soviet naval
units in the Mediterranean affords them practice in Mediterranean navigation
and opportunities for surveillance of Sixth Fleet and other NATO operations.
Hydrographic ships and ASW exercises undoubtedly provide the Soviets with
essential information on undersea conditions, water temperature gradients, and
sound propagation characteristics, which would be of particular use in their
efforts to develop ways to combat Polaris.

23. For the present, the Soviets almost certainly do not consider their Medi-
terranean squadron capable of conducting extended operations against the
Sixth Fleet, although they would seek, at the outset of general hostilities, to
attack its aircraft carriers. Other units of the Sixth Fleet would also be at-
tacked as targets of opportunity. Neither the Soviet surface units nor the current
level of submarine deployments, however, constitute a threat to US Polaris
operations. Dependent as it is on vulnerable mobile logistic support, and lacking
adequate air defense, the Soviet surface squadron could not long operate against
the greatly superior forces with which it shares the Mediterranean.

24. In recent years, Soviet naval detachments in the Mediterranean have
included at least one port call in each cruise. Since the resurgence of Soviet
naval activity in 1964, Russian ships have called at ports in Egypt six times, in
Yugoslavia and in Ethiopia three times, in Algeria twice, and in France once.
These port calls and the fact that Soviet anchorages are frequently no more than
10 or 15 miles from the coasts of Tunisia, Malta, and Greece have made the

—SEERET- - soe g
Page-15
— SECRET

Soviet naval presence in the Mediterranean quite visible. The primary purpose
of this presence is apparently less military than psychological and political.
The mere presence of Soviet combatants is intended to convey that the Medi-
terranean is not an “American lake.” Friends and foes alike are expected to
understand that the USSR intends to be a factor there.

25. There have been rumors from time to time that the Soviets were bar-
gaining for base rights in the area, usually with the Egyptians. We think it
would be incompatible with the Soviet political line to take on a role which the
former colonial powers have given up. Nevertheless, the possession by their
political clients of facilities to which the Soviets might in certain contingencies
wish to have access is no doubt a fact that Soviet planners welcome. The
equipping of forces in the area with Soviet arms is a similar advantage,* but “
we do not believe these are provided with a view to being stockpiled for eventual
use by Soviet forces.

Ill. AIMS OF SOVIET POLICY IN THE REGION

26. It is clear from the scale and character of the activities described above
that the Soviets have come to regard the Mediterranean Basin as of major in-
terest to their policy. It has not been so clear that these activities were gov-
emed by any systematic strategic conception, apart from the general proposition
that the area offered considerab'e opportunities for damaging Western interests.

27. In part, the growth of Soviet presence and activity in the area has been
a response to forces operating within the region; it has not been all Soviet design.
The main pattern of events there in the postwar period has been the struggle
of nationalist forces in many countries to expel the Western colonial powers
or to reduce their influence. These elements were interested in the backing of
a great power not previously involved in the area. The USSR emerged: from
World War II with a stature which made it eligible for this role, and, in addition,
it was a power which appeared to have “anti-imperialist” credentials. Thus the
initial Soviet entry into the area probably came about as much by invitation as

by Moscow’s own initiative.

28. The opportunity offered by the Egyptian interest in Soviet arms in the
mid-1950's probably helped to precipitate the important shift which was then
developing in Soviet policy. What was involved was a wholly new appraisal
of the changes taking place in the Third World, developments which the Soviets
had been slow to understand. Whereas they had assumed that newly inde-
pendent “bourgeois” governments would remain under the effective domination
of the colonial powers, they now discovered that there were opportunities for
injecting their own influence. They also came to recognize that the tides of
nationalism running in the Third World had a “revolutionary” potential. They
concluded that a policy of associating the Bloc with the new governments and

“The question of Soviet readiness to supply the UAR with ballistic missiles or nuclear war-
heads is discussed in paragraph 20 of NIE 30-67, “The Arab-Israeli Dispute: Current Phase,”
dated 13 April 1967, SECRET.

10 SECRET ~
Page-16
—SEEREF

the nationalist movements on a platform of “national liberation struggle” offered
a way of increasing pressure on the Western Powers. The sensitive issues in-
volved in the decolonization process could be used to generate divisions within
and among the states of the Western Alliance. The Soviets assumed that the
internal regimes in the newly independent states, in part because of their asso-
ciation with the Bloc, would inevitably take on a more radical character. When
they “chose the socialist path,” their conflict with the Western Powers would
intensify; this in turn would mean denial to the latter of access to strategically
critical areas and resources.

29. The Soviet entry into the Mediterranean area, where the anticolonial
struggle was then in a particularly active phase, was thus a manifestation of a
general policy concept intended to be applied to the whole of the Third World.
When Stalin’s successors were first seized of this vision, they evidently believed
that returns on this policy would be prompt in coming. The Suez war, the
Algerian rebellion, the overthrow of the monarchy in Iraq probably seemed to
them to indicate an acceleration of the historical process they saw developing.
In recent years, they have evidently concluded that this process would be more
prolonged and complicated than they had assumed. But the broad concept they
developed in the mid-1950’s remains central to their policy today.

30. Within the framework of Soviet Third World policy, there appears to be
a geopolitical emphasis. In recent years a large proportion of Soviet effort
and resources has been applied within the arc extending from the westem Medi-
terranean to South Asia. Other parts of the underdeveloped world seem to
be of lesser concern. Obviously this results in part from the way opportunities
have developed, but it probably owes something also to a traditional Russian
preoccupation with these regions as a sphere of special interest. The approach
of the Soviet leaders to the role of great powers in world politics is in some ways
not greatly different from that of their Czarist predecessors, who also believed
that these regions were of prime strategic importance.

31. Military considerations certainly figure in the Soviet desire to contest the
Western position in the area, although these probably do not have much to do
with planning for the contingency of general war. No doubt the Soviets would
like to deny the Mediterranean to use by US forces. Propaganda pressures
against their presence are mounted from time to time; recently, Brezhnev voiced
a pointed demand for “the complete withdrawal of the Sixth Fleet.” But the
Soviets must realize that there is little real prospect of effecting such denial

by political means.

32. Nor do we think that the Soviets aim to acquire military positions or assets
of their own which could be significant in connection with a general war.
Such assets would not enable them to strike with much greater effect at strategic
targets critical to them than they can now. An attempt to acquire a capa-
bility for successful preemptive attack on US strike forces in the area would
assume at least a very extensive ASW effort which would have to be based mainly
in the Mediterranean itself. Even if we assumed that the Soviets were designing

“SEGRE -. eon
Page-17
SEGRE

their forces for a first strike capability, which we do not, such a capability in
the Mediterranean would remain for some time well beyond their means, both
technical and political. Finally, the Soviet conception of the course a general
war might take, if it came, does not seem to include extended land or sea cam-
paigns in the Mediterranean Basin as a whole.

33. The Soviets may be thinking of their possible involvement in limited con-
flicts in the region. In principle the policy of attempting to displace Western
influence could present such contingencies. Or local conflicts might occur in
which the Soviets would wish to support their clients at some fairly high level
of risk short of actual intervention. ‘Their activities may point to an intention
someday to operate in the Mediterranean in this way.

34. Should they adopt a policy of intervention in local conflicts, the Soviets
would have to acquire capabilities which they do not now possess. They lack
limited war forces of a kind which could operate effectively in any part of the
area not contiguous to the USSR. They would need a lifting of present restric-
tions on use of the Dardanelles and a cooperative regime in Turkey, neither of
which seems possible for the foreseeable future. They would presumably want
air and naval facilities at some points in the Mediterranean Basin itself... Not
only is it unlikely that even states friendly to the USSR would wish to make
these available, but it would be extremely awkward politically for the Soviets
to acquire them. To do so would comvromise the “anti-imperialist” rationale
on which Soviet policy operates and would have negative repercussions through-
out the Third World.

35. Insofar as the Soviets have a military interest in the area, this seems likely
for the foreseeable future to have two aspects, The first is to influence the
political disposition of governments in such a way as to make the area as in-
hospitable as possible to military cooperation with the West, and in particular,
tO the deployment of US military power. The second is to establish relations
with governments which make it possible to use them as proxies for actions di-
rected against Western interests and against tegimes unfriendly to the Soviet
Bloc. Military and economic aid and the USSR's political backing as a great
power are the primary instruments of such a policy. The relationship developed
with the UAR over the last dozen years probably indicates the pattem which
the Soviets would like to develop generally in the area. :

36. Thought of as an area in which and through which to pursue Soviet in-
terests by proxy, the Mediterranean region retains its historic character as a
world crossroads. It gives access to Africa and has links with Asia. The radi-
cal nationalist movement has been strong there, and its political leaders have
been in the forefront of efforts to achieve united action against “Wester colo-
nialism and economic exploitation.” The political climate is one in which the
Soviets skills at forming fronts for subversive, political, and propaganda actions
work to good effect. Thus the Soviets probably regard the region as not only
of interest in itself but also as a useful base for support of their general strategy
in the Third World.

12 —SEEREF— a
Page-18
SECRET

37. The Soviets have surely given thought to ways in which they might tum
the West's still considerable dependence on the region’s oil supplies to their
account. But at the present stage, aspirations to preempt or control oil output
show little promise. The Bloc states cannot provide a substitute market. To
be in a position to manage the distribution of oil, and perhaps to deny it to the.
West, would assume a degree of Soviet control over producing countries which
the USSR no longer exercises even in Eastern Europe. It seems certain that,
whatever political forces hold power in these countries, they will continue to
be extremely jealous of the disposal of these national assets. Probably the most
the Soviets expect to be able to do is to encourage and exploit politically the
chronic frictions between producing countries and Western oil interests. This
might be facilitated as they buy more oil and gas in the area themselves, which
they apparently intend to do in order to meet Eastern Europe's growing require-
ments. Even modest purchases would permit them to expand their commercial
presence and perhaps to provide military goods to additional Middle East
countries.

38. As indicated, Soviet trade with the area has developed, though unevenly.
It has helped to establish relations of mutual interest with certain states, placed
personnel on the scene, and facilitated the exercise of political influence. But
generally, apart from occasional transactions to get a new trading partner in-
terested in dealing with the USSR, economic criteria are applied to this trade.
The Soviets apparently recognize that it cannot be used for direct political
leverage. Moreover, the interests of almost all countries of the area will con-
tinue to argue for maintaining extensive trading relationships with the West.

39. In sum, the Soviets see the region as strategically important—politically,
economically, militarily—in the long-term contest with the Western Powers to
which they are committed. Their primary aim for the foreseeable future will
be, in the degree possible, to deny the area politically to the West, and in par-
ticular to the US. This emphasis flows from the nature of the means available
to them. To the extent that states and political forces within the region can
be induced to look to Moscow for political direction, the Westem position will be
increasingly constricted. And alignment with the Soviet Bloc of forces in this
area would work to Soviet advantage in the struggle for the Third World as

a whole.

IV. AN APPRAISAL OF THE FUTURE THREAT TO WESTERN INTERESTS

40. There can be no doubt that the USSR has in the last dozen years made
significant progress in the direction of the aims described above. From a posi-
tion of insignificant influence it has become a major factor in the region. Most
important, it is now widely accepted by radically disposed political leaders as
a responsible ally in the vaguely defined “anti-imperialist” cause. Over the
same period, the US has tended more and more to become identified as an
opponent of this cause and as a supporter of the old order and the Western
domination that went with it. Thus the Soviets, operating within circumstances
generally favorable to their cause, have largely succeeded in making the process

SECRET. son 13
Page-19
SECRET

of transition to postcolonial development in this area an aspect of the broader
East-West power contest. It is this fact which will greatly influence the kind
of threats to Western interests which seem certain to develop in the years ahead.

41. It is important to be clear about the nature of the role the Soviets will
be playing. They will stimulate and assist anti-Western nationalist forces which
would be present in any case. Generally, they do not control these forces and
have little prospect of doing so. Thus far they have felt it necessary to be very

- circumspect about using military and economic aid programs subversively to
establish such control. There are no Communist Parties large enough or effective
enough to have hope of seizing power in their own right. Communists are pres-
ent in nationalist movements and fronts, and no doubt have penetrated govern-
ments, but their role is not directing. Obviously if the West suffers serious
reverses to its interests or areas are denied to it, there will be little comfort in
saying that this was owing to Communist-influenced rather than Communist-
controlled nationalist forces. There will be a real and probably a long-term
threat in the alliance of Soviet policy with nationalist forces in the area.

42. Nevertheless, the distinction between control and influence is vitally
important to the Soviets themselves, and will set certain limits to the kind of
actions and the extent of the risks they will undertake in pursuing their aims,
It will mean in particular that Moscow will be prudent about backing clients
who may in its view be inclined to adventurism in employing violence against
local opponents or the Western Powers. The Soviets will not make defense
arrangements which would bind them to take military action in the area.
And they will sign no blank checks for economic support. In general, they
will not enter upon commitments and risks which they cannot themselves control.

43. A further limitation on future Soviet actions in the area is the heavy in-
volvement of European as distinct from American interests. A main feature
of Soviet policy at present is the effort to dissolve the security ties represented
by the Atlantic Alliance. Actions which conveyed that the USSR was not
merely pursuing political-economic advantage in a normal manner, but was
bent on establishing real domination in the Mediterranean region would even-
tually alarm the European states. The effect would probably be to revive
a sense of common peril within the Atlantic Alliance,

Considerations of this sort
will also argue against any Soviet effort to establish a really challenging naval
presence in the Mediterranean. The Soviets are aware that their present course
of extending their political influence and acting against Western interests by
proxy offers the best means of advancing their aims without provoking high
risks or compromising their policies in Europe.

44. Even within its present limitations, however, Soviet policy is likely to
find numerous opportunities in the Mediterranean and its adjacent areas in
the years ahead. Instability and conflict, also involving Western interests, will

14 —SEGRET— 7
Page-20
—SEERET-

provide a fertile field for a long time. There are several categories of conflict
situations which will engage Soviet attention: (a) political struggles within states
between radical and traditional forces; (b) decolonization problems; (c) intra-
regional warfare arising from ethnic, boundary, and ideological conflicts; (d)
clashes of interest between regional states and the Western Powers. Not all
of the conflict situations of these various kinds will be exploitable in the Soviet
interest and some may even be awkward for the USSR. Soviet actions will in-
evitably be marked by much cautious tacking and opportunism in so complex
an area.

45. Struggles between political factions within states will usually be the
easiest for the Soviets to handle. Their support will generally be given to the
radical nationalist left against traditional forces. Success for the former is
likely to produce a pro-Soviet and anti-Western regime and to create a political
climate more favorable to the activity of local Communists. Any number of
countries in the region are candidates for a process of intemal radicalization
sooner or Jater. Syria has been in such a phase in recent years. Iraq and
Algeria were earlier, but have since shown more stability. Such developments
would not be surprising in countries as varied as Jordan, Ethiopia, Malta, and
perhaps even in Greece.

46. The Soviets are not likely to be capable of precipitating such develop-
ments themselves, but their growing presence in the area is itself an encourage-
ment to radical forces. We do not believe that the Soviets will alter their
policy of avoiding overt involvement in such internal political conflicts, but
whenever the outcome favors an enlargement of their influence they are likely
to move in on the opportunity. The extent of the commitment they would
make to a new radical or nationalist regime anywhere in the area would depend
on their judgment of its viability and of the difficulty of disengaging if neces-
sary. The pattern of Soviet relations with Syria and with Somalia suggests the
course they are likely to follow in such cases.

47. Only a few colonies remain in the region. They include French Somali-
land, the Spanish territories in northwest Africa, and the British protectorates
in South Arabia and the Persian Gulf. Such remnants of colonalism provide
a peg for anticolonialist propaganda, but they generally have the disadvantage
from the Soviet point of view that they inspire violent intraregional disputes
over the right of succession. The Soviets are likely to preserve a discreet dis-
tance from the sponsorship of concrete solutions, while offering pious but gen-
eralized backing to the cause of “national liberation.”

48. The Soviets appear content for the present to have Cairo in the forefront
of the continuing anticolonialist struggles in South Arabia and the Persian Gulf.
But they also cultivate other movements directed against Western interest, such
as the Baathist Party in Syria. They will probably continue to lend support to
Nasser with propaganda and subversive activity because they see in his brand
of Arab nationalism a means of energizing revolutionary forces in the Arab
world as a whole. Moscow is not now actively opposing the concept of Arab

SECRET. . 15
Page-21
-SECREF-

unity under Nasser’s leadership, presumably because it sees little likelihood
that any such scheme could materialize in the foreseeable future. We believe
that it remains opposed to the idea in principle, because it would be more
advantageous for the USSR to deal separately with a number of small states
rather than with a single hegemony. In the Maghreb, however, where Cairo’s
pretensions have also reached, Moscow will continue actively, if not openly, to
discourage the extension of Nasser’s influence.

49. The greater part of the turbulence and conflict in the Mediterranean area
in the years ahead will arise from intraregional disputes over boundaries, ethnic
problems, religions and ideologies. Some of the states likely to be involved
have been recipients of Moscow's aid and political backing. The Western
Powers will generally be trying to avoid direct involvement, and will in fact
be using their influence to contain violence. The principal conflict situations
of this category include those between Arabs and Israelis, Moroccans and Al-
gerians, Ethiopians and Somalis, Saudis and Egyptians, and Greeks and Turks,
though there is clearly a potential for others to develop.

50. Soviet propaganda will attempt to exploit such conflicts in the customary
anticolonialist framework, but Moscow's policies will necessarily be marked by
much opportunism. As a general principle, the Soviets will consider that their
interests would not be served if quarrels of this kind broke out into open war-
fare. Some would carry a risk of direct confrontation between the USSR and
the West. In almost all (the Arab-Israeli conflict is probably an exception),
should the Soviets make a choice between antagonists, they would run the risk
that their general influence in the area would suffer. Usually, therefore, Moscow
will use its influence to hold such conflicts below the level of large-scale violence,
the situation which often permits it to work the political ground on both sides of
the dispute. Only in the rare case of this kind, perhaps to avoid a hard choice
or to contain a really dangerous conflict, would Moscow be willing to play the
role of mediator. It would avoid such a role in open conjunction with the
Western Powers, however.

51. As indicated, the Arab-Israeli case is probably an exception among intra-
regional conflicts and provokes a different Soviet attitude. Moscow has clearly
decided that it has more to gain by taking sides, probably because it sees the
Arabs, in consequence of their numbers and revolutionary nationalism, as the
best long-term bet. If the Arabs were to make gains in their struggle against
Israel, and the Soviets had supported them, the USSR’s influence would obviously
make a substantial advance throughout the Arab world. Nor do the Soviets
have any basic objection to an Arab resort to violence against Israel, but we
do not believe that they would themselves lend direct military support to the
Arabs, and they would not run high risks of an East-West conflict for the sake

of the Arab cause.

52. The conflicts of interest between the Western Powers and certain states
of the area seem unlikely in the future to lead to actual hostilities. The end of
colonialism probably means that the Western states will prefer to rely on lesser

16 SECRET -
Page-22
SECRET

sanctions to protect their interests. Even in gross cases of aggression they will
probably seek a UN formula rather than resort to unilateral intervention. The
Soviets will make every effort, however, to keep fears of “imperialist aggression”
alive, an easy undertaking in the feverish political climate of much of the
region. Where this propaganda line is implausible, the myths of “neocolonialist
restoration” by more insidious means will often serve as well. Broadly, the
Soviets will try to keep tensions between the Western Powers and the states
of the region at a high but not critical level. In such an atmosphere, Soviet
political opportunities will be maximized and actual risks minimized.

53. We do not now foresee the time when the Soviet attitudes, aims, and
-methods described in this paper will change. This could result only from a
profound alteration in the Soviet approach to East-West relations, or alternatively,
from a gradual stabilization of the troubled region surrounding the Mediter-
ranean and Red Sea Basins. The former is not in sight and the process of
political-economic development within those regions seems likely to be prolonged.
Page-23
ANNEX

TABLE 1

VALUE OF SOVIET AND EAST EUROPEAN MILITARY ASSISTANCE
EXTENDED TO AREA NATIONS, 1955-1966
(Millions of Dollars)

 

TOTAL USSR East Europe
211 210 1
29 28 1
564 564 0
13 13 0
35 35 0
374 327 47
~ 1,439 1,160 219
91 60 31
TABLE 2

SOVIET AND EAST EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AID TO AREA NATIONS, 1954-1966
(Millions of Dollars)

 

 

Exrenvep Drawn
USSR East Europe USSR East Europe
22.5 18.6 3.4
17.0 172 58
35.2 0 52
5.6 21.3 25
22.1 72 70
13 0 13
Oo 41 0
46.1 115 61
20.0 120.8 19.0
140.0 555 25.4
. 13.7 16 1s
542.9 3798 129.1
13.0 36.7 46
—SEEREF- _ . 19

Cp. 18 blan K
Page-24
TABLE 3

MAJOR ITEMS OF SOVIET BLOC MILITARY EQUIPMENT DELIVERED
TO AREA NATIONS, 1955-1966

Mo-
Algeria Cyprus Iraq rocco} UAR Yemen

   

Land Armaments

  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
  
 

 

 

   

  
 

Heavy tank 60

Medium tank .. 7 32 400 43 425 1,100 135 80

Self-propelled assault guns 100 120 90 215 65

Amphibious light tank ... 10 why

Personnel carriers, armored

and amphibious . 365 32, 500 450 1,000 155 170
Artillery pieces, antitanl
antiaircraft .........- - 800 32, 800 100 650 1,400 460 357

Naval Vessels

Destroyers .. 4

Submarines . 15

Minesweepers . 2 6 a

Submarine chasers . 3 3 12

MTB .. 12 6 12 22 47

Other . 3 7 15 6
Aircraft

Medium jet bomber 10 26

Light jet bomber 27 15 6 50

Fighters ...... 83 92 w 13 432, w

Heavy transports . 7 8 22

Other . 54 85 5 7 309 55 3
Missiles

Air-to-surface 6

Air-to-air 20 “4 43 167 3

Surface-t ee 7 34

Surface-to-surface (ship). 6 4 17

Antitank - : 28

"Some SAMS.

“Some equipment.

 

20 ~SECRET— 7 ,
Page-25
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

wb Tinea athicedonemrntenberererreimanecisioniasl shld 28 SC

sified

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-26
oR ISSEM
