
Page-1
NIE 11-5-63
20 March 1963

 

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 11-5-63

Soviet Economic Problems

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE iN FULL

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleof
20 MARCH 1963

 

SEGRET
connie DISSEM N° 376
Page-2
The following

intelligence organizations Participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central intelligence Agency and the intelli

gence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, the Army,

the Navy, the Ai- Force, and NSA.
Concurring:

Director of intelligence and Research, Department of State

Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army

Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Novy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF
Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:

The Atomic Energy Commission Re

Presentative to the USIB, and the Assistant
the subject being outside of their

Director, Federal Bureau of investigation,
jurisdiction.

 
  

WARNING:

 
    
 
 

This material contains informate
within the meaning of the espionage la
mission or revelation of which in

eferse of the United Stotes
Page-3
wif

é through

pate 29/47

me 443.

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-5-63

Soviet Economic Problems

fer
Page-4
SOVIET ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS

THE PROBLEM

To assess Soviet economic capabilities to meet the demands
of major economic programs over the next few years and to
estimate the future course and implications of economic policy.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The Soviet leadership, in its across-the-board challenge
to the US world position, has in recent years taken on heavier
commitments than ever in the fields of general economic growth,
modern armaments, space achievements, living standards, and
foreign aid. The Soviet economy is very large and is still growing
at a substantial rate, but the competing demands generated by
this broad array of objectives have imposed increasingly severe
pressures on Soviet resources. (Paras. 1-2)

B. While some of the difficulties now being experienced can
be traced back to Khrushchey’s excessive optimism of 1957~1958,
their most important cause is the acceleration of military and
space spending. Over the last four years, these expenditures
have grown at a considerably faster rate than the economy
as a whole, and military and space programs have had first call
on the scarce resources of high-quality manpower and materials.
The resulting impact has been felt both in industry, where growth
rates have declined, and in agriculture, where output has failed
to rise above the 1958 level. In consequence, improvements in
living standards have slackened, and general economic growth
has fallen off from the high rate achieved during most of the
1950’s. (Paras. 3-9)

C. The Soviet leaders seemed to avoid difficult economic de-
cisions during 1962. Instead, they introduced a series of ex-

oF 4
Page-5
x

pedients, primarily organizational and administrative in nature,
which they hoped would restore the momentum of the economy
and relieve them of the need to sacrifice or stretch out their major :
programs. In early 1963, however, there are signs that they have
reappraised their economic position and have decided to reaffirm,
and perhaps to strengthen, the primacy of defense over other
sectors of the economy, particularly those related to consump-
tion. (Paras. 10-17)

D. We believe that, in the short run, the general pattern of
resource allocation developed over the past several years and
reasserted this year is unlikely to be greatly altered. Asa result,
however, the USSR will face accumulating difficulties in its efforts
to raise living standards, and perhaps a further slowdown in the
tempo of general economic advance. Future economic policy
may be shaped by a variety of events, such as manifestations of
consumer discontent and developments in Western military
strength and economic expansion. The allocation of resources
will probably be a central issue in the political contention which
we anticipate after Khrushchev’s departure. At some point,
economic stringencies could lead the Soviets to explore political
ways of reducing the burden of armaments, but present indica-
tions do not point in this direction. (Paras. 18-27)
Page-6
sper

DISCUSSION

1. INTRODUCTION

1. The Soviet economy, viewed from the most general standpoint, pre-
sents a piebald pattern of impressive strengths and patent weaknesses.
In industry, output per worker is roughly equivalent to that of the lead-
ing countries of Western Europe, but in agriculture it is half or less.
With its output valued in dollars, the economy is supporting military
expenditures which are about four-fifths those of the US and a gross
annual investment approximately equal to that of the US, yet consump-
tion per capita is less than one-third of the US level. Unlike that of the
US, the Soviet economy consistently operates near its capacity; thus
there is little or no cushion to meet additional demands. The growth
of the economy continues at high though no longer exceptional rates;
in the last three or four years, gross national product (GNP) has in-
creased on the average about five percent annually, and industrial pro-
duction by seven to eight percent annually.

2, While this general pattern of strengths and weaknesses has long
been characteristic of the Soviet economy, it is our judgment that the
Soviet leaders are now facing particularly difficult economic problems.
The leadership, in its across-the-board challenge to the US world position,
has taken on heavier commitments than ever in the fields of general
economic growth, modern armaments, space, living standards, and for-
eign aid. At the same time, the Soviet growth rates cited above, al-
though impressive in comparison to US performance over the last 10
years, are not as high as those recorded during most of the 1950’s, when
the yearly increase of GNP averaged about seven percent and industrial
production grew by about nine percent annually. The regime’s current
call for tighter economic controls, for higher efficiency, and for new
forms of organization and planning testifies to an increasing awareness
of stringencies. The decisions facing the Soviet leaders are becoming
more difficult and require them either to narrow their array of objectives
or to extend their earlier expectations to a somewhat more distant future.

ll. THE RECENT RECORD

3. Some of the difficulty now being experienced can be traced to a set
of decisions and targets established in 1957-1958. At that time, Khru-
shchev had recently defeated the “antiparty group” and achieved a com-
manding position, and the presumptions underlying the Seven-Year Plan
(1959-1965) bore the marks of his characteristic optimism. In agricul-
ture, he apparently believed that, with the initial successes of the New
Lands and other post-Stalin programs, a momentum had been achieved
which would carry farm output forward without further large injections

SEQRET 3
Page-7
segfer
of capital. Agricultural production in 1958 did in fact rise by a startling

13 percent, but this was due primarily to the coincidence of good to
excellent weather in all major farming regions.

4, In industry, Khrushchev appears to have relied heavily on future
gains in efficiency resulting from the modernization of factories and the
administrative reorganization which he had pushed through, against
strong political opposition, in 1957. Conscious of the manifold in-
efficiencies and backwardnesses of Soviet industry, and confident of his
ability to overcome them, he launched a major campaign for mechaniza-
tion and automation and instituted a reduction in the work week. The
latter decision seems to have been based on excessive hopes for a rise
in man-hour productivity and has accounted for some of the decline in
industrial growth rates.

5. Khrushchev’s optimism partly explains another, probably more im-
portant reason for current difficulties: the apparent failure of Soviet
planners correctly to foresee future military demands and their impact
upon the economy. In 1956 and 1957, reductions in military manpower
and arms output brought down defense spending, and this was an impor-
tant factor in maintaining growth in other sectors. Thereafter, every-
thing, including Khrushchev’s own foreign policies, has conspired to
increase the military burden, and estimated military expenditures grew
by about one-third between 1958 and 1962 while GNP was rising by
slightly over one-fifth. The introduction of advanced weapons and
equipment on a large scale required heavy new expenditures. Western
resistance to Khrushchev’s Berlin demands of November 1958 obliged
the USSR to build up its strategic strength if it were to make credible its
threats of unilateral action. The military leadership balked at Khru-
shchev's plans to save money by reducing conventional forces and par-
ticularly ground troops, and a rekindling of the Berlin crisis in 1961 led
to shelving that project. The continued growth in Western military
strength throughout this period, and the damage done in 1961-1962 to
the image of Soviet strategic power, have put the USSR under increasing
pressure to raise defense expenditures.

6. The growing military burden, together with rising space expendi-
tures, has in recent years increasingly held back the advance of the
Soviet economy. This effect is particularly noticeable in the industries
producing machinery and equipment, where weapons and other military
hardware compete directly for resources with industrial, agricultural,
and transportation equipment and consumer durables. The production
of machinery and equipment for nonmilitary users, which increased
by an estimated 14 percent or more annually in the years 1955-1958,
grew at a rate of only nine percent or less in the ensuing years. Produc-
tion for the military, on the other hand, which declined slightly in the
earlier period, rose by an estimated average of 13 percent per year after

4 SEQRET
Page-8
safer

1958. Moreover, it seems certain that orders for military and space
programs have enjoyed priority in the competition for specialized, high-
grade resources, such as design engineers, highly trained technicians,
and high-quality materials and components.

7. We estimate that military and space programs consumed in 1962
over 35 percent of the total Soviet production of durable goods, as com-
pared with about 25 percent in the US. The effects of the military and
Space programs are discernible in the deliveries of machinery to agri-
culture and in the general trends in the equipment portion of investment.
The production of trucks, tractors, and other machinery for agriculture
fell by nearly two-fifths between 1957 and 1959 and had regained only
80 percent of the earlier level by 1961. Investment in machinery and
equipment increased by 16 percent annually from 1955 to 1958 but only
an average of about 9 percent per year subsequently. This factor, along
with difficulties in the planning and completion of new construction,
explains the drastic slowdown in the growth of investment, which rose
by only 4 percent in 1961 and 4 or 5 percent in 1962 after increases
of 14 percent or more in the years 1956-1959.

8. Under the impact of these problems, the post-Stalin improvement
in Soviet living standards has begun to slow down perceptibly. The
leveling off in agriculture, where net output in 1962 was about equal to
that of 1958 but had to support 14 million additional people, is the
major cause of this slowdown. In addition, however, the continued
low priority of light industry in the competition for modern equipment
and skilled labor has kept this a backward sector producing shoddy goods
which frequently go unsold despite the continuing rise in money incomes.
The annual volume of new housing has remained roughly stationary over
the last three years.

9. While per capita consumption is still rising, the declining pace of
improvement and the attendant growth of inflationary pressures have
not been without repercussions. Certain price and tax measures intro-
duced in 1962 created strong popular resentment and raised fears that
consumer interests would be further circumscribed in the future. This
was particularly evident in the provincial cities which have traditionally
lagged far behind Moscow, Leningrad, and Kiev in quality of consumer
goods and the amenities of life; in several locations the decision of June
1962 to raise meat and butter prices was followed by demonstrations and
even riots on the broadest scale in many years.

Ill. CURRENT POLICY RESPONSES

10. Despite the pressures generated by these problems and the fact
that the rate of economic growth has declined, the Soviet leaders have
been reluctant to accept the conclusion that some programs would have
to be sacrificed or stretched out. Instead they have devised a number

SpfpReT "5
Page-9
sigher

of expedients intended to boost the productivity of the land, labor, and
capital at their disposal. Measures were taken in 1962 to bring order
into the field of construction, where chronically inefficient building prac-
tices and poor coordination between construction work and the delivery
of equipment had further increased the volume of unfinished work in
1961. By placing a moratorium on many new starts and suspending
work on low priority projects in order to permit the concentration of
resources on completing major projects, the Soviet authorities achieved
some success in bringing these projects into operation, but at consider-
able additional cost. Because of a lack of skilled labor and other inputs,
a plan for added shifts in machinery plants has so far brought few
results, although over the next several years this scheme may enable
the USSR to get more production out of its existing factories.

11. In agriculture, Khrushchev launched in late 1961 yet another of
his sudden campaigns to bring “hidden reserves” into action. This time
he called for planting high-yield crops on the greater part of acreage
previously lying fallow or sown to grasses or oats. He was unable, how-
ever, to secure the additional inputs of machinery, fertilizer, and skilled
manpower needed to take full advantage of this new pattern of land
use. Meanwhile the plowing up of fallow in the New Lands is likely to
intensify the problem of weed control, moisture preservation, and soil
erosion which already plague these areas; elsewhere, the cultivation of
areas now under rotational grasses will deplete the soil unless there is
applied a great deal more lime and fertilizer than is presently available.

12. In the military and space fields, expenditures mounted by an esti-
mated 10 percent in 1962, primarily because of the growing deployment
of offensive and defensive missiles, production of their nuclear warheads,
and research and development of newer weapons systems. Since we
have little evidence bearing upon recent decisions concerning future
programming, we do not know whether economizing measures of any
sort were devised during the year. Statements by military leaders sug-
gest, however, that they are continuing to press for higher military alloca-
tions in order to cover growing expenditures on advanced weapons sys-
tems without offsetting reductions in expenditures on conventional
forces. One element in the decision to undertake the Cuban missile
venture may have been the prospect of getting a quick increase in the
strategic threat posed against the US at comparatively low cost.
Whether or not this was the case, the Soviet leadership is still faced with
the difficult question of how to achieve, within the USSR’s economic
possibilities, a strategic posture impressive enough to support the full
range of its foreign policy objectives.

13. The November plenum launched a familiar response to economic
problems in the form of an administrative reorganization of both the
party and government. This new scheme greatly reduced the role and
number of regional economic councils, which were the core of the 1957

6 sof
Page-10
reorganizations; their activities were placed under closer central direc-
tion and their responsibilities for construction and industrial research
were transferred to central agencies. Most important, immediate super-
vision of enterprises was transferred to local party bodies. These party
committees in turn have been divided into two hierarchies, one for
industry and the other for agriculture, and have been charged with
basic responsibility for plan fulfillment, changes which reflect Khru-
shchev’s faith in the ultimate ability of the party to correct faults in
the economic system. In an associated move a joint party-state control
organization was established to combat falsification, speculation, and
other illegalities which plague the economy. ll these and other related
changes continued the process, which began several years ago, of modify-
ing Khrushchev’s 1957 administrative decentralization.

14. These shifts testify to Khrushchev’s continued belief that new
administrative arrangements can be used to unlock “hidden reserves”
throughout the economy and to help bring about a return to the growth
rates of the 1950’s. We believe that, on the contrary, Soviet enterprises
will be faced with more administrative confusion, multiple and uncoordi-
nated plans from different levels, and inconsistencies between production
targets and material supply. Thus, in our view, the new schemes are
more likely to increase than to diminish the inefficiencies of administer-
ing a large planned economy. Further, they increase the likelihood of in-
stitutional conflicts between the party and the economic administration,
and perhaps within the party apparatus as well.

15. In undertaking this major reorganization, the Soviets appear to
have set aside any large-scale introduction of reforms which would deal
more effectively with these problems. Soviet economists have in recent
years developed and publicized various schemes to rationalize the opera-
tion of the economy. Some, such as Professor Liberman, have suggested
that enterprise directors be granted greater latitude in choosing the ways
of reaching centrally-set output goals; others have argued that pricing
systems should be developed and allowed to play a larger role in determin-
ing the allocation of resources. But such proposals encounter bureau-
cratic inertia and ideological objections; moreover, they contain some
danger of eventual encroachments on the leadership’s powers to enforce
its priorities, and the November plenum merely allowed for continued
discussion and small-scale experimentation. Similar objections prevent
the leadership from easing its problems by allowing a greater latitude to
private economic activity. In fact, the stress in recent years on “building
communism” has been accompanied by new restrictions on private owner-
ship of livestock and private housebuilding which have significantly held
back progress in both animal husbandry and housing construction.

16. Over the last three years, Khrushchev has repeatedly argued the
case for the consumer. He has urged specifically that more funds be
devoted to agriculture and has warned that failure to satisfy the growing

ye

segter | 7
Page-11
he

demand for consumers goods could lead to strong inflationary pressures
and a drop in worker morale. We do not know how large a shift in
allocations he has had in mind; it may in fact have been relatively small,
for Khrushchev like his colleagues is strongly devoted to the goals of
continued industrial growth, a strong military establishment, and Soviet
pre-eminence in space. In any event, his past proposals to divert more
funds to agriculture were for the most part shelved and the moderate
increases in net agricultural investment achieved in 1962 and planned
for 1963 fall far short of the effort necessary to initiate sustained growth
in this sector.

17. In his speech of 27 February 1963, Khrushchev strikes a quite dif-
ferent note. Rather than urging a higher priority for consumption, he
now is concerned to warn Soviet consumers of coming disappointments
and to forestall criticisms by citing defense needs. His statements sug-
gest that the leadership has recently reappraised its economic possi-
bilities in the light of the shortcomings of the last two years and, perhaps,
the strategic situation in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis. His
strong reaffirmations of military priorities reflect, at a minimum, a deter-
mination to proceed with programmed expenditures and, beyond this,
a possible decision to increase military spending above previously planned
levels. The recent establishment of a Supreme Economic Council for
industry and construction and the appointment of a specialist in defense
industries as its head could reflect such a decision. In any case, Khru-
shchev indicates that, at least for the time being, there can be no sub-
stantial increases in allocations to agriculture and that the program to
raise living standards will be further delayed. While he reaffirms the
objective of rapid industrial growth, in our view it is also possible that
investment for general industrial expansion will fall further behind
schedule.

IV. THE OUTLOOK

18. In spite of their severe economic problems, the Soviets are still
maintaining a high rate of investment—currently about 30 percent of
GNP—which will continue to provide for substantial growth. The entry
of larger postwar age-groups into the work force, together with an end
to further reductions in the work week, will ease the now relatively tight
labor supply, and the number of experienced engineers and technicians
is constantly expanding. Particularly acute construction difficulties
probably will be overcome, although a certain chronic disorder will
continue. A year of favorable agricultural weather is overdue, and
when it occurs, will provide a fillip to this sector and to the economy as
a whole.

19. These factors seem insufficient, however, to produce a significant

rise in the rate of economic growth. Given the ambitious long-run
objectives of the leadership, the USSR’s basic need is for more investment

8 SEQRET
Page-12
she

to provide the higher rates of growth which would permit a fuller satis-
faction of competing demands. In the short run, however, any sub-
stantial increase in investment could only be made at the expense of
the military and space program or the consumer. In 1956 and 1957,
additional investment funds and manpower were made available by a
reduction in defense spending; subsequently, when military and space
spending rose, a slowdown in the growth of consumption permitted in-
vestment to keep growing. In the last two or three years, however,
not only have difficulties accumulated in the consumption sector, but
the growth of investment itself has slowed.

20. This situation must inevitably focus the leadership’s attention
upon the military budget and space program. Several elements are
likely to be subject to continuing review. One is military manpower
and conventional weapons, where Khrushchev once claimed significant
savings were possible. Another is the manned lunar landing program;
the Soviets have a strong incentive to beat the US in this effort, but
Khrushchev and others have complained of the great expense of such
a project, and the USSR is not yet publicly in the race. A third is the
long-range striking forces, on which it may be possible to hold down
expenditures by stressing qualitative improvements, such as very high-
yield warheads or a greater missile load per submarine, rather than
the continued proliferation of delivery vehicles. A fourth is the anti-
ballistic missile program, in which the Soviets face a choice among
deployment now of a costly existing system, deployment later of an
improved but probably even more expensive system, or no deployment
while research and development continues to seek a breakthrough which
would reduce costs, provide more certain effectiveness, or both. Recent
Soviet statements indicate that military and space programs continue
to enjoy a high priority, but future stringencies may lead the USSR
to reassess them at a later date.

21. Should the Soviets decide that growth rates must not fall below
the level of the past two or three years, then it is probably necessary
that expenditures on defense and space increase no faster than GNP
and that these programs consume no more than their present share of the
total output of machinery and equipment. It is likely that, under such
a pattern of allocations, the present growth rate of GNP could be main-
tained well into the second half of the decade. At the same time the
leadership probably could carry out a course of moderate but sustained
improvement in consumer welfare.

22. Alternatively, the Soviets might decide to continue to increase
military and space expenditures at a rate which takes a growing share
of GNP and machinery production. In these circumstances, investment
in the industries supporting defense and basic growth almost certainly
would hold priority in the competition for the remaining resources, and
the consumer would feel even more strongly the effects of continued

SEQRET 9
Page-13
SpRET

underinvestment in agriculture, light industry, and housing. Under
this pattern of allocations, it would be more difficult to sustain present
growth rates, not only because of greater stringency in investment re-
sources, particularly machinery and equipment, but also because of
the possible effects, to which Khrushchev has frequently drawn atten-
tion, on worker morale and productivity.

23. For the immediate future, we believe that the Soviets are more
likely to respond to their economic problems with minor adjustments
and further expedients than with any radical new decisions. The record
of recent years suggests that the contending arguments in favor of in-
vestment, of defense, and of consumption are all strongly felt within
the leadership. But current evidence indicates that no new restraints
on military and space spending are in view, and that administrative
pressuré and reorganization are regarded as the chief means of improving
the performance of the civilian sectors. If we have correctly assessed
the state and prospects of the Soviet economy, however, the Soviets
will find before long that these expedients are unsatisfactory and that
they are facing slower tempos of advance.

24. The Soviets continue to use foreign trade as a means of alleviat-
ing some of the strains in their economy, especially through the import
of capital goods from the industrial West. Current and prospective
trends in Soviet foreign trade suggest, however, that domestic difficulties
in certain sectors may be aggravated by growing export demands. Ship-
ments of civilian machinery and military hardware to the underde-
veloped countries will represent a small but increasing claim on pro-
duction capacity which is already under strain from high priority in-
ternal programs. At the same time, Soviet indebtedness to Western
Europe and Japan, primarily for imports of capital goods, has been
growing rapidly, and the USSR will face the problem of generating an
export surplus sufficient to meet these obligations.

25. There is a chance that events might precipitate important new
decisions affecting the allocation of resources. The immediate outlook
for the consumer, for example, is poor, and it is possible that mani-
festations of discontent will match or even exceed the scale of 1962.
The leadership's response to such a situation could range from a sig-
nificant upgrading of consumer priorities to reliance upon repressive
policies. The course of external events will almost certainly have an
influence upon policy choices. East-West tension and an improvement
of Western defenses, for example, would strengthen the argument for
higher military spending, while economic expansion in the US and
Western Europe would bolster arguments for a higher rate of invest-
ment to match the performance of the capitalist economies. Even the
relatively small foreign aid program might be curtailed in the search
for additional resources, particularly if political trends in the under-

10 SEQRET
Page-14
developed countries fail to meet Soviet expectations or to produce promis-
ing new opportunities.

26. One conceivable Soviet response to economic strains would be
for the USSR, at some point, to consider political ways of reducing the
burden of armaments. Such a reduction could be sought either by arms
control agreements or by working to bring about a more relaxed in-
ternational atmosphere in which the USSR felt able to cut its military
spending without jeopardizing its security or giving up its political
objectives. The first of these courses would require the USSR to move
some distance closer to Western terms for agreement. The second would
require a protracted period of fairly genuine detente, in which the USSR
forebore from policies alarming to the West in hopes of inducing its
opponents to reduce their defenses. Present indications do not, how-
ever, point in either of these directions. While economic pressures may
lead the Soviets to explore these possibilities during the next several
years, any actual shift of policy would also depend on a variety of po-
litical considerations and even on fortuitous events which could con-
front the USSR with unexpected problems or opportunities.

27. In the contention for power which we anticipate after Khru-
shchev’s departure, one leader might try to build popular support by
arguing for improvements in welfare, while another might court a
military following by sponsoring high allocations to defense. The ques-
tions of decentralization and liberalized methods of managing the econ-
omy might arise at that time as factional issues. We do not know which
particular questions will come to the fore or how they will be resolved,
but we think it certain that economic issues will be a central element
in the succession struggle, which itself might lead to important changes
in the Soviet system.

dee on
Page-15

Page-16
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a, Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department cf State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for ihe Office of the Secretary of
Defense

<. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Desariment of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the

 

Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Stoff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

f. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staft

g. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

h. Assistant Director, F8!, for the Federal Burea. of Investigation

Director of NSA, for the Notional Security Agency
|. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may ratain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be a
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with [AC-D-69/2,
22 June 1953.

 

4. The title of this document when used seoarately from the text should be classified:

Ce

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-17
CONTROYED DISSEM