
Page-1
SEC BB NIE 11-5-65
co DISSEM 22 January 1965

7

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-5-65
(Supersedes SNIE 11-5-64)

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf
22 Janvary 1965

fr

SEG@RET .

con Si DISSEM Ne 389
f
Page-2
: : , SEC

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, AEC, and NSA.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:

The Assistant to the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being
outside of his jurisdiction.

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner fo an unauthorized person is prohibited.

 

GROUP T
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and

declassification

 

 

 

 

SECRET
Page-3
#

sof

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-5-65

Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects

This dscument has been
approved foz release through
the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of
the Central Intelligence Agsncy.

pate_// 27 (44

ae (13
Page-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

  

 

Page
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ..............00.. 000.0 ce cece eee eee 1
DISCUSSION .... 2.00.26 eee ene ees 4
I. GENERAL TRENDS ...... Sete 4
I. PROBLEMS OF THE ECONOMY: NR Re rr . 6
A. Recent Background and Policies |. wee cme e hee tectaade 6
B. Problems and Performance in Key Sectors of the Economy .......... 7
Agriculture 2.00... 2.000 7
Industry and Industrial Investment ....................... .. 8
The Chemical Industry 9
Military and Space Programs 9
Foreign Trade .....0...00.00..000c0eeecees 10
Foreign Aid ....... per ee eee eet stenenetecece nace nea baeaeetneedoene anal i
Consumption ............... 00002 e eee eee eee ee seceeeees UM
Organization and Management .....................00..2020000 ee i

Ill. THE CURRENT ECONOMIC SCENE AND SHORT-TERM. OUT-
LOOK 2... eect beet e ence eee 12
A. The Policies of the New Leadership .................0...00.00045 13
B. Economic Controversy ..........0 006.0060 c cece e eee ee elec eee 14
C. Economic Performance .......... 020.0... 0.000 c cece ences e ee 15
IV. LONG TERM OUTLOOK ................00..0 0c ccc cece eee eee 15
A. Basic Long Term Problems .............. 2.0.0.0 cc eee eee eeeee eee 15
B. Military Spending and Economic Growth ............2......20005 17
C. Agriculture and Economic Growth ...................22000 cee eee 18
Page-5
ANNEX A
Page
Table 1 USSR: Indicators of Economic Growth, 1951-1963 .............. 22,
Table 2 USSR: Average Annual Rates of Growth in Industrial Production,
by Branch of Industry, 1951-1963 22.02.00... occ eeee eves 22

Table 3 USSR: Production and Annual Rates of Growth of Important Indus-
trial Items, 1959-1964 and Plans for 1965 .................... 23

Table 4 Soviet Defense Expenditures, by Category of Expenditures for
Selected Years ....006.0 0.0 24

Table 5 USSR: Method of Financing the Soviet Hard Currency Deficit,
1959-1963 260s

Table 6 USSR: Estimated Medium- ‘Term Credits Furnished by the Indus-
trial West, 1959-1963 . eet 25
Table 7 USSR: Production, Disposition, and Reserves of Gold, 1955-1965 .. 26

Table 8 USSR: Average Annual Percentage Growth in Per Capita Con-
sumption, 1951-1963 and Projected 1964-1965 ................. 26

 

   

ANNEX B

Follows page
Figure 1 USSR: Growth in Gross National Product, Product in Industry,
and in Agriculture, 1956-1963 ........ 000.20... eee eee 27

Figure 2 USSR: Indexes of Net Agricultural Production, Population, and
Production of Bread Grains (Wheat and Rye), 1950-1963 ..... 27
Page-6
segft

SOVIET ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS AND
PROSPECTS

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

A. The USSR has a powerful economic base and the necessary
resources for further development. Its GNP has grown by some
80 percent in the past decade and is now about half that of the US.
It achieves rapid growth in industrial production especially in heavy
industry and maintains a costly modern military establishment second
only to that of the U.S. (Paras. 1-2)

B. Nevertheless, in terms of annual growth, the Soviet economy
has been slowing down across the board for the past six years. In
some key sectors, such as industrial production, the decline in growth
rates has been appreciable. In others, such as investment, it has been
steep, and in still others, including agriculture, there has been vir-
tually no growth at all. (Para. 4)

C. This general slowdown in growth rates, in part the result of
increasing expenditures on defense and space programs, has led in
recent years to a somewhat more sober official appraisal of both eco-
nomic capabilities and prospects. It has also been accompanied by
considerable controversy within the leadership and by intense com-
petition for resources among various civilian and military claimants.
Problems of this nature were greatly complicated in 1963 by a nearly
disastrous wheat harvest and were at least partly responsible in 1964
for the decision to remove Khrushchev. (Paras. 3, 7-9)

D. While the new Soviet leadership has come out publicly in favor
of a more consumer-oriented economic plan for 1965, we expect only
modest changes in economic policy in the coming year, in part be-
cause the collective leadership is likely to temporize over hard choices.

sigha 1
Page-7
. safer

More rational attention may be devoted to the feasibility of various
goals, however, and some further organizational changes are almost
certain. (Paras. 37, 39, 42, 45)

E. Industrial production during 1965 could increase by as much

_as seven percent, compared to about six percent in 1964. Assuming

normal weather, agricultural production in 1965 might exceed that
of the very poor year 1963 by up to 15 percent. (Para. 46)

F. Such fundamental problems as the overcommitment of re-
sources, inadequate agricultural production, and slower growth can-
not be dodged over the longer term. One of the principal issues
which must sooner or later be faced is the question of defense spend-
ing and its effects on other sectors of the economy. We believe that
the new regime desires to restrain the growth of defense expenditures
and that the new budget reflects a continuing tendency toward level-
ing off. We estimate that, barring important changes in the inter-
national situation, major changes in Soviet defense spending in either
direction are unlikely, but that such spending will edge upward in
the years ahead. (Paras. 53-54)

G. Probable Soviet military and space programs through 1970
foreshadow greater requirements for highly skilled engineers and
scientists, complex machinery, and high-cost materials. This is the
aspect of defense spending which hampers efforts to raise productivity
in the civil economy. Even if defense spending were to increase by
as much as one fifth during this period, however, the Soviet economy
could shoulder the burden and at the same time gradually improve the
equipment and technology of industry and the standard of living. If,
on the other hand, defense spending were to decrease slightly, the
absolute requirement for these scarce resources would be little differ-
ent from that of 1964. In these circumstances, with an increasing
supply of these resources, made available by general growth, the strain
on the civil economy would be eased. (Paras. 19, 55)

H. The marked decline in the rate of return on investment in the
USSR since 1959 strongly suggests that not even a major reallocation
of resources and thorough-going economic reform would be likely to
restore the high growth rates of the 1950s. The range of growth
rates for Soviet GNP which seem realistically possible through 1970
is from four to six percent annually. ,The Soviet leaders will be dis-

2 fa
Page-8
of

appointed by such a rate. As problems continue and even multiply,
and as shifts in domestic politics and on the world scene occur, con-
troversy may grow and one or another leader may come to advocate
new and far-reaching programs calculated to attract support from
other leaders and interest groups. Whatever the shape of future
political contention, or its outcome, economic policy will almost cer-
tainly remain a key issue. (Paras. 49, 51-52, 58)

I. The picture is different if Soviet economic prospects are viewed,
not against the ambitions of the leadership, but against the performance
of other developed economies. An overall growth of four to six per-
cent annually during the remainder of the decade would still represent
a respectable achievement. Under any likely scale of priorities, the
USSR will be able to strengthen an already formidable military ca-
pability, sustain a vigorous space program, and provide resources for
a foreign aid program which can help to maintain and extend Soviet
influence abroad. (Para. 59)
Page-9
SEQRET

DISCUSSION

|. GENERAL TRENDS

1. The USSR has a powerful economy and the necessary resources for further
development. Its GNP has grown by some 80 percent in the past decade and
is now nearly half as large as that of the US. It maintains a costly modern
military establishment second only to that of the US, and achieves rapid—albeit
spotty—growth in industrial productioti and technology. Over the past decade
industrial production has doubled and is now nearly half that of the US. By US
standards the lot of the Soviet consumer is drab—real per capita consumption
is less than one-third that of the US—but by his own past standards, and by
the standards of all but a few nations of the world, his lot is tolerable.

2. In some areas of economic effort, the USSR has made particularly notable
progress over the past decade or so, especially where the leadership has chosen
to concentrate resources and effort. Traditionally, heavy industry and the in-
dustries supporting the military establishment have been given priority emphasis,
and they have achieved some excellent results. For example, steel production
has grown rapidly, reaching some 85 million tons in 1964 or about 44 million more
tons than in 1954. Similarly, oil production reached some 224 million tons in
1964 or about 164 million more tons than in 1954. These records have been
attained concurrently with impressive programs in the military and space fields
which have also required the use of great quantities of resources and of con-
siderable technological skill. Thus, though it has fallen short of many ambitious
goals, the Soviet economy has done quite well in many sectors of greatest concern
to the leadership.

3. Nothing on the domestic scene, however, has so consistently agitated the
Soviet leadership as the question of how best and for what purpose to use the
economic resources at its disposal. This problem, involving a broad array of
sensitive political issues and touching on the prerogatives and aspirations of all
the major interest groupings in the society, has become the subject of a great
and widening controversy. In this situation, Khrushchev sought at times to be
a coordinator and compromiser of disputes, at other times to be a leader and
an innovator of policy, but he was frequently unable to resolve the controversy
or to proceed resolutely with a program of his own.

4, The removal of Khrushchev, however, does not in itself resolve the con-
troversy or provide his successors with ready solutions to their principal economic
problems. The rate of growth of the Soviet economy has been slowing down
across the board for the past six years. (See Figure 1.) In some key sectors,
such as consumption and industrial production, this decline has been appreciable.
In others, such as investment, it has been steep, and in still others, including
agriculture, there has been virtually no growth at all. At the same time, there

4 SEQRET
Page-10
sofa

has been a fairly consistent and impressive rise in defense expenditures and
this has contributed substantially to the slowdown in the advance of the economy
asa whole.

5. This general slowdown in growth has come at a time when the country's
resources have been asked to meet an unprecedented array of ambitious and
competing objectives. In the optimistic spirit of the times, Khrushchev in 1958
issued his call for economic competition with the West, promised his own people
dramatic advances in living standards, further committed himself to maintain
a large-scale foreign aid program, and began to increase the allocation of scarce
resources to the USSR’s modern weapons and space programs. The difficulties
since encountered in the effort to fulfill Khrushchev’s grand design for the
economy have had an impact on a broad range of Soviet policies, both foreign
and domestic.

6. Internationally, the USSR’s inability to meet its well-publicized goals tar-
nished its prestige. These difficulties have also contributed to the relative
restraint of its foreign policy toward the industrial West, the potential supplier
of advanced machinery and credits. Within the Communist movement, Soviet
economic policies have been attacked from both left and right; attempts to gain
greater managerial efficiency and to increase the quantity and quality of benefits
for consumers have been challenged by the Chinese as manifestations of “bour-
geois capitalism,” and derided by some Western Communist parties as vacillating
and insufficient. Internally, the economic situation has led to considerable
disagreement among politicians, planners, and military figures, and fostered con-
siderable economic discontent and political skepticism among the people at large.

7. As time went by, Khrushchev became increasingly concerned about the
progress of the Soviet economy, and the impact on it of rising military costs.
For the most part, however, the Soviet leadership was unwilling or unable to
face up to its economic difficulties in an effective way; it relied, instead, prin-
cipally on political exhortation, patchwork programs of administrative reorganiza-
tion, compromises between contending points of view about resource allocations,
and demands for the exploitation of what it calls “hidden reserves.” Only in
the past year or so have there been some signs that the leadership, especially
Khrushchev, was prepared to deal more decisively with some of its problems.
Khrushchev, in the period immediately preceding his removal, may finally have
tired of debate and delay. His remarks to farm audiences in August advocated
individual responsibility for specific crop areas, and his last appeal in September
for a consumer-oriented long-term plan suggested that he had decided to over-
ride the doubters and dissenters in order to push ahead with plans of his own.

8. In any event, the problems of the Soviet economy and Khrushchev’s erratic
efforts to deal with them contributed to his downfall. Surely, the indictment
against his leadership would include: (1) a long series of agricultural schemes

+ This and all other references to defense expenditures include both military and space
spending.

of 5
Page-11
of

which tampered with doctrine, interfered with production, and attempted to
play games with nature; (2) his peculiar faith in the magic of reorganization, which
led him into a variety of party and state shuffles that first gave, then took away,
decentralized, then recentralized; and (3) most important, his ebullient optimism,
which led him repeatedly to over-estimate the ability of available resources to
satisfy the demands of his various programs. The record as a whole, revealing
shortcomings of both style and content, clearly provided Khrushchev's colleagues
with both reason and pretext for this ouster.

ll. PROBLEMS OF THE ECONOMY *

A. Recent Background and Policies

9. The USSR’s economic problems were greatly aggravated in 1963 by a nearly
disastrous wheat harvest. The situation clearly called for both short-term emer-
gency measures, to compensate for agricultural failures, and longer term remedies
perhaps involving a restructuring of investment priorities or a general stretchout
of economic goals.

10. The leadership responded to the immediate emergency by rejecting pro-
posals to introduce food rationing, apparently fearing the reactions of increasingly
disgruntled consumers; it elected, instead, to use its already depleted gold stocks
for the purchase of some $800 million worth of wheat and flour from the. West.
The response to longer term problems has been less clearcut. Khrushchev’s an-
nouncement of a vigorous new program for the chemical industry in 1963 did
indicate some revisions in investment priorities, but, during the first half of
1964, both the leadership and the planners seemed to behave in a manner re-
flecting confusion and uncertainty. In any case, while awaiting the results of
the 1964 harvest, the regime was understandably reluctant to draft new programs
and commit resources.

11. The situation did, however, force the leadership during the past year and
a half to wrestle somewhat more realistically with the root causes of long-term
wealmesses in the economy. In launching the new chemical program of 1963,
for example, it acknowledged the necessity of seeking help for these programs
from the West, in the form of plant, equipment, technology, and credit. And,
in this same period, it was compelled to consider ways and means of curbing
the serious drain on high quality resources imposed by defense expenditures.
In the second half of 1964, the regime was occupied with the question of ways of
improving consumer welfare, and Khrushchev in September designated this as
the chief task of long-term planning. It was also led to reopen public discussion
of how best to manage and plan the economy in the years ahead—it was at least
(and at last) willing to listen carefully to the ideas of the economists who were
critical of the inefficiencies and inadequacies of the existing system.

12. The success of the 1964 harvest has relieved the economy of its most
pressing immediate burden. Largely because of the contrast between the last
two harvests, GNP, in 1964, rose by perhaps as much as six percent, twice the

6 sf
Page-12
wf

average rate of the two preceding years. But, this success—resulting primarily

from favorable weather—does not in and of itself promise relief from the main *

problems besetting the economy. Moreover, official statistics concerning eco-
nomic performance during the first nine months of 1964 reveal a further decline
in the rate of growth of both industrial production and labor productivity.

B. Problems and Performance in Key Sectors of the Economy?”

Agriculture

13. In the five years following the death of Stalin, Soviet agricultural production
grew by more than 40 percent. Largely on the basis of this record and its
unjustified optimism about the productivity of new programs, the leadership
adopted a seven-year plan (1959-1965) which implied an increase in net produc-
tion, of some 55 to 60 percent. Production did subsequently reach a new peak
in 1961, but fell by a total of some six percent during the next two years, prin-
cipally because of poor weather. Total output in 1963 was below that of 1958,
and was less by some 10 percent on a per capita basis (see Figure 2).

14. Crop production in 1964 should at least equal that of the very good year
of 1958. Grain production for 1964 is estimated tentatively at 125 million metric
tons, contrasted with the 1963 total of about 95 million. This will permit some
replenishment of the state’s depleted grain reserves, eliminate the need for
imports of wheat and flour, and assure that last year’s bread shortages will not
be repeated. But the sorry state of livestock will limit the gains in diet; on a
per capita basis, 1964 crop and meat production was below the highs of the
late 1950s.

15. The Soviet leadership has recognized that the USSR’s food problem is
basic and long-term. Investment in agriculture since 1960 has grown at a sub-
stantially higher rate than investment in any other sector of the economy except
chemicals. Ambitious plans for increases in the production of fertilizers, pesti-
cides, herbicides, and appropriate farm machinery, reiterated by Khrushchev in
the spring of 1963, have been stepped up, and programs for large-scale irrigation,
extensive application of lime, and combating wind erosion have been announced.
In the area of incentives, the regime has raised the prices paid for a number
of commodities, instituted a pension program for collective farmers, and—since
Khrushchev's ouster—relaxed certain restrictions on private holdings of land
and livestock.

* Throughout this estimate the aggregative statistics or indexes which are presented have
been calculated by CIA. Soviet official statistics are not used unless otherwise indicated.
Most of the official Soviet aggregate measures of growth in the economy (such as national
income, industrial and agricultural output) are not accepted by Western economists. More-
over, some official commodity data such as those relating to grain production have been re-
jected. Substitute measures constructed by us and other Western economists almost invariably
indicate that there are substantial degrees of over-statement in the Soviet measures.

SEQRET 7
Page-13
16. Though post-Stalin efforts to rescue Soviet agriculture from years of neglect
did succeed in improving the lot of the peasant and boosting production, many
problems have been ignored, dealt with inadequately, or aggravated by ill-
conceived solutions. The general malaise of Soviet agriculture is the conse-
quence of party, state, and local mismanagement, backward technology, inade-
quate supplies of chemical products and farm machinery, shortages of trained
agricultural specialists, insufficient incentives for the peasantry, official discourage-
ment of private (and more productive) agricultural activity, and in general,
insufficient and misdirected investment.

Industry and Industrial Investment

17. Unlike the situation in agriculture, Soviet industrial output has continued
to grow at a moderate rate in recent years and has made vigorous advances in
a number of specific areas. Nonetheless, there has been an appreciable slow-
down in the annual rate of industrial growth; we estimate that the average
annual growth rate fell from about 8% percent for the years 1956-1959 to about
6% percent for 1960-19632 The growth of industrial production in 1964 is
tentatively estimated at about 6 percent.

18. This slowdown is associated with a severe decline in the rate of growth
of investment in new plant and equipment. Investment in industry, which rose
by about 14 percent annually in 1958 and 1959, increased by only 3% percent
annually in 1962 and 1963; preliminary indications do not suggest a substantial
improvement in 1964. The amount of investment in construction and construc-
tion materials, which grew at a rapid rate until 1960, declined absolutely in
both 1962 and 1963. Despite these trends, the Soviets have managed to main-
tain a fairly steady increase in the accumulation of industrial plant and equipment.
They haye done so principally by greatly reducing the rate of retirement of
older facilities and by stepping up expenditures for their repair. These pro-
cedures compensate for the falling rate of investment but do so at a high cost
in terms of productivity. Thus the average annual rate of growth in plant and
equipment in 1956-1959 came to about 11% percent and was associated with
an average annual rate of growth in industrial output of about 8% percent. By
contrast, in 1960-1963 an average annual rate of increase of about 11 percent
in industrial plant and equipment sustained an increase in output of less than
6% percent per year.

19. Among the factors contributing to this lag in productivity gains is the
difficulty in getting new plants into operation and in keeping old plants in
full operation during a period of rapid technological change. But perhaps the
single most important factor is the demand of the defense program since 1958
for scarce resources and highly trained manpower. The concentration of these

*See Table 2-for average annual rates of growth, 1951-1963, by branch of industry. See
Table 3 for estimated production figures of major industrial items (iron, steel, fuel, power,
ete.), 1959-1963 and planned figures for these items, 1964-1965. :

8 SEQRET
Page-14
wh,

specialized resources on research, development, production, space activities, and
deployment of advanced weapons has interferred seriously with the introduction
of new technology in industry (e.g., automation and new chemical processes).

The Chemical Industry

20. The big increase in output of chemical products is a key part of the Soviet
effort to step up the rate of economic growth. The program is intended to
achieve a wide range of objectives: to support an upsurge in agricultural pro-
duction, to provide the consumer sector with large quantities of synthetic fibers,
and to supply industry with a variety of substitutes for more costly metals. In
1964, the performance of the chemical industry was impressive, although not all
the goals were met. Investment rose sharply, and overall production grew by
about 18 percent, with particularly high rates of growth in fertilizers and pesti-
cides. Despite this progress, a number of major shortcomings continue to plague
the industry, including planning errors, construction delays, lack of skilled per-
sonnel, and slow rates of achieving capacity operations at new plants. As a
result, increases in output have been achieved at high cost.

21. The new leaders are making significant short-term adjustments in this
program, In 1965, they are stressing the completion of unfinished plants, and,
more important, the bringing of new plants up to designed rates of output. In
order to concentrate resources on these tasks, they apparently intend to start
fewer construction projects in 1965 than Khrushchev had intended to launch.
This decision is reflected in a slower rate of increase in new investment and a
go-slow policy on imports of Western chemical equipment.

22. We believe that these modifications are intended only to divest the chem-
ical program of its “crash” nature, and that the new leaders continue to regard
it as critical to the tasks of economic modemization and growth. In framing
the Five-Year Plan (1966-1970), they may scale down some of Khrushchev’s more
ambitious 1970 chemical targets, but the new Goals almost certainly will reaffirm
a high priority for this industry. The setting of new targets will require, how-
ever, a careful consideration of credit and repayment possibilities for Western
equipment and technology. It will also require a close scrutiny of those scarce
resources—sophisticated equipment, complex construction techniques, and highly
skilled personnel—for which chemistry will be competing with other key sectors
in the coming period.

Military and Space Programs

23. We estimate that after a decline from a peak in 1955, Soviet military and
space expenditures began to rise in 1959 and by 1962 were about 25 percent
greater than in 1958. We further estimate that these expenditures continued to
grow in 1963 and 1964, though at a much slower rate than in the previous four
years. The impact of these programs on the machinery and equipment sector
of the economy has been particularly great; expenditures on military machinery
during 1959-1964 rose faster than total defense expenditures. .

SEQRET 9

Leger rag
Page-15
S@PRET

24. This pattern of growth was due principally to the development and pro-
duction of complex new military equipment and space hardware. For example,
we estimate that expenditures in 1963 for the procurement of advanced weapon
systems (missiles, ground-based electronics, and nuclear warheads), for research
and development, and for space programs were twice the 1958 level. (See
Table 4.) We believe that these expenditures increased slightly in 1964. These
“programs usurped specialized skills and resources critically needed for other
important economic objectives.

Foreign Trade

25. The total value of Soviet trade in 1964 amounted to about $15 billion.
About two-thirds of this was with Communist countries; about one-fifth ($3 bil-
lion) was with the industrial West. For the past decade, purchases from the
West have consistently exceeded exports and resulting convertible currency
deficits have been financed largely through medium-term credits and substan-
tial Soviet gold sales. As a consequence, estimated Soviet gold reserves have
dwindled from $3 billion at the end of 1954 to about $1.5 billion at the end of
1964. The convertible currency deficit, about $100 million in 1959, reached an
estimated $700 million in 1964. (See Tables 5, 6, and 7.)

26. Soviet imports of Western machinery grew from about $200 million in
1958 to about $600 million in 1963. Of the 1963 total about one-fourth was
equipment for the chemical industry. In 1964 these imports have not yet
strongly reflected the impact of the new chemical program announced in De-
cember 1963, Contracts for chemical plants and equipment let since December

1963 now total only some $200 million, although discussion with Western sup- .

pliers has offered the prospect of a much larger program. Because repayments
on past, medium-term credits are increasingly offsetting new drawings on such
credits, large net additions to Soviet capital equipment imports would likely
require substantial long-term financing.

27. The USSR has strictly curtailed imports of industrial raw materials and
new orders of industrial equipment from the Free World throughout the past
15 months. Soviet reluctance to undertake a substantial expansion of equip-
ment imports over the past year, despite Western offers of at least $650 million
in long-term credit, probably indicates both heightened concern for the Soviet
international reserve position and greater official uncertainty about the alloca-
tion of investment funds than we had previously postulated. It is possible that
signing of credit-financed contracts may increase after the new Five-Year Plan
has been clarified. However, the Soviet regime is aware that its past rate of
growth of exports (of both gold and commodities) will be more difficult to main-
tain in the future. The recent caution in accepting the commitments for future
repayments that large credits entail suggests that the regime is delaying decision
until its export prospects become clearer. :

10 ffs
Page-16
A
Foreign Aid

28. The hiatus in Soviet extension of economic aid to less developed countries
of the Free World was ended as new credits rose from only $75 million in 1962
to around $250 million in 1963 and some $800 million (most of it to India, the
UAR, and Algeria) during 1964. Cumulative Soviet commitments in credits
and grants to non-Communist countries now total $4.3 billion. While only about
$1.4 billion of this has as yet been drawn, the rate of expenditures has been rising
rapidly, reaching an estimated $400 million in 1964; repayment rates have also
been increasing and should total about $100 million this year. Credit extensions
under the 10-year-old Soviet military aid program to non-Communist countries
now total some $2.8 billion, most of which (about $2.5 billion) has been drawn
upon. Since these Soviet programs do not involve either gold or convertible
currencies, and do not ordinarily require goods readily exportable to the West,
they do not materially affect the Soviet gold or hard currency position.

Consumption .

29. The hopes aroused by extravagant promises, and by fairly substantial in-
creases in both the quantity and quality of consumer goods and foodstuffs during
the 1950's, have been sorely disappointed since 1960 by a sharp decline in the
growth of per capita consumption. (See Table 8.) Indeed actual setbacks to
the consumer, such as the major price inereases on meat and butter in 1962 and
the shortages of bread and flour in 1963, have led to sporadic demonstrations of
discontent,

30. The economy also suffers from inflationary pressures. Disposable money
income and consumer expenditures rose in roughly equal proportion during
1956-1960, but thereafter the growth of income, though it slackened, outran ex-
penditures. The effects of agricultural difficulties and a slump in the output
of soft goods were soon felt in the retail market. Prices on the free (collective
farm) market—a good barometer of inflationary pressures in the USSR—began
to rise and by 1963 the official index of these prices was 18 percent above the
1960 level. The regime responded in 1962 by raising certain food prices, post-
poning scheduled increases in minimuni wages, and halting the program for the
abolition of the income tax. But, in July 1964, Khrushchev reactivated a two-
year program—postponed since 1962 in part as a result of economic problems
and defense needs—which will further stimulate inflationary pressures. As
reaffirmed by his successors, some 18 million workers in service industries are
scheduled to receive a 21 percent wage rise, the basic minimum wage is to be
raised from 27-35 rubles to 40-45 rubles per month, and the state is to contribute
to a pension fund for collective farm workers,

Organization and Management

31. The economic planning and administrative system in the USSR works, but
not well. Enterprise managers are harassed by detailed requirements and by
poor coordination of plans for production and supply and are frequently en-

SEQRET 1
Page-17
sof

couraged to produce the wrong assortment of goods by the regime’s standards
for measuring success. Authority and responsibility at levels above the indi-
vidual enterprise are diffused among a variety of local party and state organs
and a vast number of central organizations. The top planners themselves face
an ever mounting volume of detail and must make decisions partly on the basis
of an artificial price system which, among other things, does not reflect relative
scarcities. The various reorganizations of the administrative apparatus which
have taken place since 1957—including the strengthening of the party’s role in
1962—do not seem to have helped matters and, indeed, may merely have added
to the confusion and duplication. -

32. Since 1962, “liberal” Soviet economists, including Professor Liberman, have
proposed a number of reforms which, while not advocating an earthshaking
transformation of the Soviet economy, would in some ways tend to give the
system a cast of “market socialism.” They reflect, in the main, a preoccupation
with methods of evaluating the performance and rewarding the success of eco-
nomic enterprises-on the basis of profitability. Some also suggest the establish-
ment of pricing systems which would more nearly reflect supply and demand
and which would provide a rational assessment of costs (including interest
charges on capital). In general, these proposals would also involve the re-
organization of planning systems so as to retain overall central control but to
relieve enterprise managers from detailed and stultifying plans from the center.

33. In the spring of 1964, limited experimentation with a new system of pre-
mium payments for the directors and other top officials was introduced at some
80 enterprises. At the same time, the regime decreed a more far-reaching ex-
periment at two clothing plants which involved the scheduling of output by type,
quality, and, within limits, price, in response to orders from retailers. The new
leadership has decided to extend this system to about a third of all clothing
plants and shoe factories, and Kosygin has advocated the extension of a similar
system to heavy industry.

Ill, THE CURRENT ECONOMIC SCENE AND SHORT-TERM OUTLOOK

34, The economy which Stalin left to his successors, centered as it was on
the manufacture of steel and machinery, proved to be poorly suited to con-
temporary demands and opportunities. Over the past 10 years, the Soviet
leadership has been striving to adjust production, technology, and the ad-
ministrative structure to meet these demands and opportunities. But a variety
of circumstances made it difficult to achieve the necessary reallocation of
resources. These included the inertia produced by the existence of powerful
industrial, military, and bureaucratic vested interests, ideological prejudices
which inflated the importance of certain economic sectors and organizations,
and a political environment which bred unrealistic goals.

35. To be sure, there has been a growing awareness in recent years that the
economy was, in fact, lagging and that steps to revivify it were badly needed.
During the latter half of 1963 and part of 1964, a number of signs pointed to

12 SRQRET
Page-18
a more sober official appraisal of Soviet economic capabilities and prospects.
The relative modesty of economic goals for 1964-1965, the actual implementation
of some new programs, as in the chemical industry, and recent public state-
ments—especially Khrushchev's proconsumer pronouncements in late Septem-
ber—contained hints of a reorientation of economic policies for the future.
Generally speaking, there was some reason to believe that the Soviet economy
was facing a period of changing relationships among the major civilian sectors,
and perhaps between these sectors and the military-space complex as well.

36. Nonetheless, nearly every recent economic program has stumbled and
fallen short. At least some of this failure was due to Khrushchev’s own peculiar
approach to problems: his over-optimism, search for panaceas, sweeping cam-
paigns. and periodic reorganizations which led to confusion and waste. The
few oblique statements on the reasons for Khrushchev's removal have highlighted
the dissatisfaction of his successors with such matters as Khrushchev’s style, his
harebrained schemes, commandism, and armchair decisions. In this however,
we think his successors exaggerate the costs of his leadership and overstate
the benefits of his removal. *

A. The Policies of the New Leadership

37. Khrushchev’s successors have reaffirmed his broad goals for the Soviet
economy, and we believe that they do not intend at present any major changes
in the pattern of resource allocation. It is likely, however, that there will be
fairly substantial changes in organization and methods of operation; these could
produce some changes in the allocation of resources, even though broad objec-
tives remain unaltered. One of the new regime's first moves was to eliminate
the division of the party into industrial and agricultural components. A vigorous
discussion continues in the press on ways to stimulate better economic decisions,
suggesting that gradual reforms in this area are intended. A rumored change
may strenghten central ministries responsible for single industries on a national
scale, at the expense of the regional economic councils, which were designed to
improve economic administration in individual areas of the country.

38. The new regime has indicated that it would like to proceed with the diffi-
cult task of allocating scarce resources without the jarring clatter of controversy
over heavy industry versus light industry. Brezhnev's’ statement that heavy
industry must serve the needs of defense, re-equipment of the economy, and
consumers goods suggests a pragmatic approach—an intent to base plans for
heavy industrial production on concrete objectives rather than making such
production an end in itself. In addition, the new leadership has increased
emphasis on modernization and quality of output, and will probably rely more
on economic incentives and careful planning to introduce new technology and
less on exhortation. Physical goals may be scaled down, but in the end more
may be achieved than under Khrushchev.

39. The new regime has chosen to come out in favor of a consumer-oriented
program for 1965. It has promised immediate and large gains in consumer
welfare through a boost in planned money incomes and communal services and

SEM@RET 13
Page-19
SEQGRET

a step-up in housing construction. These measures are reminiscent of those
promulgated after Stalin’s death and again shortly after Khrushchev's ascendency
to supreme power in 1957, and are probably calculated, in part, to enhance
the appeal of the regime. But the regime has also indicated that this emphasis
on the consumer will be continued in the coming Five-Year Plan (1966-1970).

40. The leadership also announced a small cut in the explicit defense budget
for 1965, which is associated with a US intention to reduce its own defense
budget. Although the military activities financed through this account may be
reduced somewhat in 1965, the elements of defense spending which have been
growing most rapidly in recent years—research and development and space
activities—are those which are not included in the defense account as announced.
The small reduction in the overt defense budget planned for 1965 could easily
be offset by increases in other defense-related accounts in the budget. We
believe that no important cutback in defense spending has, in fact, been made,
though it is probable that the new regime desires to restrain the growth of de-
fense expenditures and that the new budget does reflect a continuing tendency
toward leveling off. -

41, In agriculture, the compelling question is the long-run food supply. Efforts
to intensify and modernize agriculture are bound to continue, but manner and
method will almost certainly undergo great change. The new emphasis is on
a “rational” and “scientific” approach, as opposed to Khrushchev's crash programs
and predilection for panaceas. The costly modernization of animal husbandry
recently advocated by Khrushchev is likely to be shelved in favor of a less-
precipitous development in the same direction. The New Lands will not be
abandoned, but their importance will no longer be stressed, and the long over-
due introduction of good farming practices is likely to be pushed energetically.
Efforts to increase incentives will figure prominently.

42. There is, of course, a limit on what the leadership can do in the coming
year concerning the reallocation of resources to the benefit of the consumer, and
the 1965 plan does not, in fact, indicate any major shuffling of resources. But if
the regime holds down military spending, and makes improvements in opera-
tional and managerial efficiency, it could lay the groundwork for more far-reach-
ing changes in the coming Five-Year Plan.

B, Economic Controversy

43. There are a multiplicity of issues and a profusion of interest groups within
the Soviet command structure. Certainly many military leaders and repre-
sentatives of the older branches of heavy industry would welcome the end
to the kinds of pressures Khrushchev exposed them to, including force cuts and
diatribes against “metal eaters.” Many in the party apparatus would favor a
return to old doctrines, including the ideological insistence on priority develop-
ment of heavy industry, and regularization of the chain of command. Vested
interests in the central bureaucratic organs would also resist any administrative
changes in the direction of decentralization. Even those functionaries most

14 SE
Page-20
sof

closely associated with the agricultural and chemical programs might applaud
an end to helter-skelter management and a letup in the drive for fast results.

44. There are also contrary interests and ideas represented at the upper and
middle levels of the political and economic hierarchy. There are probably
numbers of officials who recognize the desirability of adjusting the economy
to meet new requirements and the demands of consumers and who would per-
ceive the dire consequences for their own areas of interest if further resources
were diverted to defense programs. There are also influential economists who
recognize many of the ills of the Soviet system and who have campaigned for
structural and allocational reforms. And there are middle-level functionaries in
both party and state organs who have developed vested interests in one or an-
other of Khrushchev’s pet programs and who would thus resist any efforts to
tamper with the status quo.

45. We believe that controversy over economic policy is likely to continue
and perhaps even grow. But, politically, the safest immediate course is one
of compromises, and Khrushchev’s successors are likely to move cautiously in
most areas of economic policy. The charges of erratic and irrational behavior
against Khrushchev no doubt reflected, among other things, genuine dismay
among his colleagues; in any case, each of them will now seek to avoid an ap-
proach which could lead to a similar indictment. The collective nature of the
present leadership will also probably restrain for the time being any impulses
toward either forward leaps or major retreats.

C. Economic Performance

46. The growth of industrial production during 1964 was about six percent.
This rate could improve somewhat during 1965, perhaps to seven percent, as
a result of improvements in agricultural raw materials supply, some additions
to capacity brought in by the completion of various construction projects, and
some diminution of the confusion occasioned by shifting targets and changes
in organization. Assuming normal weather, agricultural production in 1965
might exceed that of the very poor year 1963 by up to 15 percent (a level no
better than that of 1958 on a per capita basis). Larger amounts of fertilizer
will be available for grain crops and could produce an increase in the harvest
equal to the amount of grain which had to be imported in 1963. The output
of chemicals could approach the planned increase of 36 percent for the two-year
period.

IV. LONG TERM OUTLOOK

A. Basic Long Term Problems

47. The development of the Soviet economy has failed to keep pace with the
expectations of the men who control it. This lag has led to many-sided con-
troversies within the Soviet leadership over how best to accomplish economic
aims and just what the priorities among yarious objectives should be. . These

SERET 15
Page-21
SMFRET

disputes have centered in the main on two issues, the proper allocation of re-
sources, and the best methods and institutions for planning and administration.
An essential problem for Khrushchev’s successors, then, is to find some way of
fashioning policies which can somehow both resolve the disputes and restore
momentum to the economy.

48. In the matter of resource allocation as it affects economic growth, the
traditional argument of heavy industry versus light industry and agriculture in
effect missed the main issue. This way of putting the question obscured the
fact that heavy industry serves the need of defense, of consumer-oriented sectors,
and of investment for further growth. The key problem really was what kinds
of heavy industry should be emphasized, e.g., for missiles or chemicals, and in
what proportions. Khrushchev was on the right track in characterizing the task
as one of investing in the newer industries which could make the most effective
use of capital and which could better meet the emerging demands of an economy
striving to modernize. Aware of the competition of the military, he sought to
limit its allocation. But he chronically underestimated costs, first of missiles,
then of chemicals, and probably of irrigation and the mechanization of agri-
culture as well. His characteristic over-optimism brought him into conflicts
not only with those who disliked his objectives but also with those who shared
them but gravely doubted the feasibility of his programs.

49. In order to achieve high rates of growth, it is necessary for investment—and
hence heavy industry—to grow faster than other areas of output. The growth
of plant and equipment (maintained by a corresponding growth of investment)
must be at a significantly faster pace than the rate of growth of GNP; in the
1950s, plant and equipment in the entire economy grew at an annual rate of
nine percent, sufficient to maintain an average increase of some seven percent
in GNP. Since 1959, this relationship has become more unfavorable—it now
appears that an annual growth of nine percent in plant and equipment might
sustain an annual GNP increase of only five percent. This decline in the pro-
ductivity of capital, ie., the increase in output associated with a given increase
in plant and’ equipment, has come about largely because the Soviets have ex-
hausted many of the easily available opportunities for applying new technology.
Prospective increases in the size of the labor force are not adequate to offset
this trend.

50. This trend strongly suggests that not even a major reallocation of resources
and thoroughgoing economic reforms would be likely to restore the high growth
rates of the 1950s. The Soviet leaders, however, will be loath to accept this
conclusion, and in their search for ways to overcome the lag, they seem inclined
to consider new methods of planning and administration. In the process, it has
become clear that, at the present stage, Marxism-Leninism offers little guidance.
In fact, it is notable that all current proposals draw inspiration from Western
practice or from “market socialism.” The direction of current thought suggests
that the Soviets, like the East Europeans before them, are perceiving the limita-
tions of Communist doctrine as applied to a modern economy and that, at least
in this field, they recognize that need for ge.

16 SEQRET
Page-22
sof

51. While the collective leadership, as long as it lasts, is likely to temporize,
various foreign and domestic issues cannot forever be avoided and the problem
of the economy is likely to be among the most pressing. As problems continue
or even multiply, and as shifts in domestic politics and changes on the world
scene occur, one or another leader may come to advocate new and far-reaching
programs calculated to attract support from other leaders and other interest
groups. Whatever the shape of future political contention or its outcome,
economic policy will almost certainly be a key issue.

B. Military Spending and Economic Growth

52. A central problem facing the new leadership is the question of defense
spending and its effect on economic growth. The range of growth rates for
Soviet GNP that seem realistically possible in the period 1964-1970 is from four
to six pércent annually, if the relative priorities given to various non-military
programs retain roughly their recent pattern and if the weather conditions for
agricultural production are normal. The actual growth rate attained within
this range will depend in large part upon future levels of defense spending.

53, Current National Intelligence Estimates of Soviet military and space pro-
grams imply a range of future defense spending: on the high end, overall ex-
penditures in 1970 might be about 20 percent greater than in 1964, and on the
low side they might be about 10 percent below the 1964 level. The high end
of the range would imply that expenditures for the procurement of advanced
weapon systems, for research and development, and for space by 1970 would
be some’ 40 percent greater than in 1964; on the low end, the 1970 level of
expenditures for these weapon systems and programs would not be significantly
different from that for 1964. Considering these and other factors; we believe
that if Soviet defense expenditures in 1970 were 20 percent greater than 1964,
Soviet GNP could grow some 25 to 35 percent over this period, or between four
percent and five percent per year. On the other hand, if defense expenditures
were to decrease to 90 percent of the 1964 level, Soviet GNP might grow about
six percent per year and be some 40 percent greater in 1970.

54, We estimate that, barring important changes in the international situation,
major changes in Soviet defense spending in either. direction are unlikely,
but that such spending will edge upward in the years ahead. If and when one
man achieves primacy in the leadership, however, the chances of wider change
will increase.

55. Given the uncertainties of both the estimates of civilian economic develop-
ments and the size and composition of the defense program, conclusions about
the “burden” on the economy of defense expenditures can be stated only in
general terms. Probable Soviet military and space programs through 1970
foreshadow an increase in the requirement for highly skilled engineers and
scientists, complex machinery, and high-cost materials. Even if defense spend-
ing were to increase at the rate implied by the high side of the range, the Soviet

SEQRET 7
Page-23
fl

economy could shoulder this burden and at the same time gradually improve
the equipment and technology of Soviet industry and the standard of living.
If, on the other hand, defense spending decreased as implied by the low end
of the range, the absolute requirement for these scarce resources would be little
different from that of 1964. In these circumstances, with an increasing supply
of these resources, the strain on the civil economy would be eased.

C. Agriculture and Economic Growth

56. The future course of the Soviet economy will also depend on developments
in agriculture. The essential feature“of the long-term program for agriculture
which Khrushchev formulated over the last year and a half was a substantial
increase in grain output and a reduction of its annual fluctuations. This was
to be accomplished by a major expansion of irrigation, and large increases in
the application of fertilizer, particularly in areas of dependable rainfall.

57. It remains to be seen how much the new leadership will modify Khru-
shchev’s ambitious program. Though we do not know how long it will last,
the present partial relaxation of restraints on the size of private holdings of
kitchen gardens and livestock suggests that the regime is searching for inexpen-
sive ways to increase output. But the major increment to output during the
balance of the decade must come from improvements in the socialized sector.
It is almost certain that resources allocated to this sector will be increased over
present levels. With the implementation of large-scale fertilizer and irrigation
programs, we estimate that by 1970 agricultural output can be raised as much
as two-fifths above the abnormally low level of 1963, and a third above the
nearly normal weather year of 1962. This would imply an average annual
increase of three and. one-half percent over 1962, and would permit an average
annual increase of GNP within a range of four to six percent.

58. In sum, the Soviet economy faces a variety of fundamental problems: un-
satisfactory growth in rates of productivity, a declining return on investment,
a shortage of high quality resources and skilled manpower, and a generally in-
efficient system of management. In addition, the economy will be crucially
affected by political decisions respecting the allocation of resources, which in
turn will be influenced by changes in the world situation unforeseen and un-
controlled by the USSR. In general, the Soviet leaders will almost certainly be
disappoined by the performance of the economy throughout the remainder of
this decade. They will be tempted to experiment, perhaps in a radical way,
with the management and even with the basic organizational structure of their
economic system. The whole situation will, in our view, be an important source
of dissension within the top leadership, and a factor in the struggles for power
which are virtually certain to occur.

59. The picture is different if Soviet economic prospects are viewed, not
against the ambitions of the leadership, but against the performance of other
developed economies. An overall growth during the remainder of the decade

18 sof
Page-24
sagh

of four to six percent annually would still represent a respectable achievement.
Under any likely scheme of priorities, the USSR will be able to strengthen an
already formidable military capability, sustain a space program which can vigor-
ously compete with that of the US, and provide resources for a foreign aid. pro-
gram which can help to maintain and extend Soviet influence abroad.

. |
fo 19
Page-25
ANNEX A

NOTE

Rates of growth and other statistical comparisons in ‘the tables which follow
have been carried out numerically to the degree required to make valid com-
parisons. The presentation of the data to the first decimal point, however, does
not necessarily reflect a comparable degree of accuracy in either the absolute
level of a given value or in the absolute difference betweeen two values.

The base year used in deriving average annual rates of growth is the year
preceding the given year.
Page-26
TABLE 1
USSR: INDICATORS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
1951-1963
“ Average Annual Rates of Growth (Percent)
1951-
INDICATOR, 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963
Industrial production....... 10.2 8.6 8.6 8.6 8.5 7.3 6.9 7.0 5.8
Total investment (new fixed) 12.5 14.9 12.8 16.2 13.2 8.0 4.3 4.9 2.9
Productive investment. 12.5 12.3 5.2 13.3 14.1 9.0 5.8 71 5.9
Industrial. . 12.6 14.5 5.2 13.0 15.6 10.4 4.3 4.9 2.1
Agricultural 5.8 4.4 12.8 7.0 2.4 10.2 10.6 14.7 ’
Nonproductive investment 20.5 27.9 21.0 12.0 6.5 1.8 1.30 —2.6
Agricultural production
Moving average for 3 years. 8.5 T1 18 2.0 1.6 2.5 0.6 na
Straight annual average. 11.7 0.1 10.3 -4.1 0.5 86 1.2 —5.1
Gross national product. . 8.3 4.9 9.2 4.0 4.8 6.7 3.4 1.7
* Base year is 1951.
TABLE 2 an

USSR: AVERAGE ANNUAL RATES OF GROWTH IN INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION, BY BRANCH OF
INDUSTRY 1951-1963

 

  
  
 
   
   

PERCENT

1951—
1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963
Industrial materials. . 10.2 8.8 9.8 10.0 9.7 6.3 5.5 6.8 6.5
Machinery. 10.5 8.7 8.2 7.0 7.8 10.3 9.9 8.6 7.0
Civilian. 9.9 17.9 14.5 8.6 5.8 9.5 11.5 10.2 8.7
Military.... 11.20 —0.5 0.8 4.5 10.6 11.7 7.8 6.6 4.6
Nondurable consumer goods. 9.9 7.9 6.9 7.6 7.3 4.3 5.0 4.5 2.0
Processed foods 9.5 10.1 7.2 6.8 8.2 1.8 8.0 5.4 1.7
10.1 6.6 6.6 8.2 6.7 5.8 3.2 4.1 2.2
10.2 8.6 8.6 8.6 8.5 7.3 6.9 7.0 5.8

 

22 safle
Page-27
SMRET

TABLE 3

USSR: PRODUCTION AND ANNUAL RATES OF GROWTH OF IMPORTANT
INDUSTRIAL ITEMS 1959-1964 AND PLANS FOR 1965

 

  

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

AVERAGE
ACTUAL ACTUAL
1959-1962 1963
1, Industrial production (percent)... ... 7.46 5.86
2. Machinery production (percent)...... 9. 0°
3. Ferrous metallurgy
Crude steel
Million metric tons. 80.2
Percent......... 8.6 5.1
Rolled steel
Million metric tons............. 62.4
Percent. 8.3 5.1
4, Fuels and power
Coal -
Million metric tons. 532
Percent......... La 2.8
Natural gas
Billion cubic meters 89.8
Percent. 27.2 22.2
Crude oil
Million metric tons. |, 208.1
Percent......... 13.3 10.6
Electric power
Billion KWH. 412.1
Percent... 11.9 11.6
5. Chemicals production (percent) . 9.9° 11.9°
Mineral fertilizers, gross weight
Million metric tons. 19.9
Percent... a 8.6 15.5
Chemical fibers
Thousand metric tons. 308
Percent........... 13.7 11.2
Plastics and synthetic resins
‘Thousand metric tons. 589.4
Percent....... a 16.4 24.6
6. Soft goods (percent) . 5.0° 2.26
Fabrics
Million square meters. 6,849.7
Percent............ 3.4 2.9
Leather footwear
Million pairs, 463
Percent... 6.4 1.4
Knitted articles
Million units 687.3
Percent. 6.7 6.7

 

See footnotes at end of table.

 

 

REVISED
PRELIMINARY FLAN
1964+ 1965
-0 8.1
4.5¢ 9
84.9 90
5.9 6.0
66.6 70
6.7 5.1
552 na
3.8 na
“109.1 126.6
21.5 16.0
224 242
9.2 7.6
453.3 510
10.0 12.5
18.0 15
25.5 33.5
28.1 31.4
357.3 416
16.0 16.4
702 900 ©
19.1 28.2,
3.40 na
7,225.4 7,414.4
5.5 2.6
474 477
2.4 0.6
766° 922
11.4 20.4
23
Page-28
TABLE 3 (Continued)

 

 

 

  

AVERAGE REVISED
ACTUAL ACTUAL PRELIMINARY PLAN
1959-1962 1963 1964 * 1965 >
7. Processed foods (percent)............ 5.8° 1.7 2.1° 10
Sugar (beet and cane granulated)
Million metric tons...........-- 6.22 6.89 8.61
Percent........0..000eeeeeeeee * 9.5 —20.3 10.8 25.0
Vegetable oil
Million metric tons. 2.21 1.84 2.15
Percent. —- 9.6 4.6 na 17.0
Meat €
Million metric tons. 5.4 4.3 na
Percent.........- 9.3 12.6 —20.0 na

 

* Based on reported performance of the first nine months of 1964 and estimated per-
formance during the last three months of the year.

» Reported in December 1964. Percent changes are relative to preliminary 1964 production-

Rates of growth for 1959-1964 are based on CIA indexes.

4 Based on the assumption that the goal given by Kosygin was expressed in linear meters.

* Based on performance during the first half of the year.

* Excluding kolkhoz production.

« Excludes kolkhoz and household production.

TABLE 4
SOVIET DEFENSE EXPENDITURES, BY CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES* (1955-1970)

Billion Rubles

 

 

1955 1958 1962 1963 1964 1970
Total Expenditures 15.0-15.8  13.3-14.8 15.7-18.8 —-15.6-19.5 —:15.0-19.9 1334-2334
Operating *..........0.05+ 7.9 6.4-7.4 6.7-7.7 6.8-7.9 6)4-834
Investment >..........2-+ 6.5-6.7 6.9-7.7 6.2-7.5 5.2-7.2 3h4-7
Including: Procurement of .
missile systems, ground
electronics, and nuclear
warheads...........+++ (1.0) (1.6-1.9)  (8.7-4.1) —(8.3-4.0) (2.63.7) (2-334)
Reaearch, Development, Test,
Evaluation and Space....  0.6-1.2 1,8-2.1 2.4-3.7 2.7-4.2 2.9-4.8 336-834

 

* NOTE: Because of rounding, components may not add to the totals shown. ‘The upper end of the range of expendi-
tures was used in calculating rates of change presented in paragraphs 23-24.

« Operating expenditures include all expenditures for personnel and operation and maintenance.

» Investment includes all expenditures for procurement of military equipment and construction of facilities.

24 oY
Page-29
S@PRET

TABLE 5

USSR: METHOD OF FINANCING THE
SOVIET HARD CURRENCY DEFICIT

 

 

  

1959-1964
Million Current US $
NET
MEDIUM-
TERM
CREDITS
« HARD FROM THE
"cURRENcY SALES INDUSTRIAL
YEAR, DEFICIT* oF GOLD > WEST °
—100 303 40
—300 149 168
—250 310 135
239 117
. 5204 61
500 16
La
* As a result of trade with total non-Communist

world,

> Minimum estimates.

° The USSR almost certainly obtained no medi-
um-term credits from the West before 1959.
Figures in this column include an allowance for
interest at an annual rate of 5 percent.

4 Preliminary estimate.

TABLE 6

USSR: ESTIMATED MEDIUM-TERM CREDITS
FURNISHED BY THE INDUSTRIAL WEST *

 

 

1959-1964
Million Current US $
our
STANDING
DEBT
AT THE
NEW  REPAY- INTER- = NET ~—s BND OF
YEAR CREDITS MENTS EsT>. CREDITS THE YEAR
1959. 50 10 0 40 40
1960 225 55 2 168 210
1961 250 105 10 135 355
1962 300 165 18 117 490
1963 300 215 24 61 575
1964 °. 300 255 29. 16 620

 

 

* Including only those credits obtained from Western indus-
trial suppliers in connection with purchases of. machinery and
equipment. The average length of credit is five years. Ex-
cluding short-term financing (18 months or less).

* Interest computed at an annual rate of five percent.

* Preliminary estimate.

     

 

 

25
Page-30
SEQRET

TABLE 7

USSR: PRODUCTION, DISPOSITION, AND RESERVES OF GOLD +

 

 

 

1955-1965
: Million Current US $
orHER
ADDITIONS
AND RESERVES
ner wire: AT THE END
CONSUMP- , DRAWALS CHANGE IN OF THE
TEAR PRODUCTION TION SALES> «© (NET) RESERVES YEAR *
1955. 121 20 70 n 42 3,000
1956. 17 20 154 Negl. —57 2,900
1957. 119 20 275 21 —155 2,800
1958. 125 20 182 4 —63 2,700
1959. 136 20 303 18 —169 2,500
1960. . 144 37 149 0 42 2,500
1961.0... 154 37310 0 —193 2,300
1962. . 168 37 239 0 — 108 2,200
1963 179 37 520° 0 —378 1,800
1964 190 37 500 0 —347 1,500

 

1965 205 to 210

* Rounded to the nearest hundred million.
> Minimum estimates.
* Preliminary estimate.

7 . TABLE 8

USSR: AVERAGE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE GROWTH IN PER CAPITA CON-
SUMPTION 1951-1963 AND PROJECTED 1964-1965

PERCENT
ESTI-
MATED
PROJECTIONS
1951- 1956— 1960- 1962- 1964—
1955 1959 1961 1963 1965 +

 

  
 
 
   
 

 

 

 

Total consumption. 5.7 3.8 2.5 2.2 2.1
Nonfood goods. 10.9 5.7 4.2 1.8 3.1
Soft. 9.8 5.0 3.3 1.2 2.4
Durable. 21.0 10.3 8.7 4.8 6.2
Food... 4.3 2.9 1.2 1.4 0.4
Animal products. 2.9 5.4 —1.5 2.5 na
10.3 4.6 44 4.5 ne
Basic foods 1.500 -1.4 0.8 3.6 na
Services : 4.5 4.7 5.0 4.9 5.7
Health and education 3.6 3.5 4.8 3.8 4.6
Housing. ........... ~0.1 2.4 1.9 1.2 0.9
* Based on Soviet plans for nonfoods and services and estimate of trend in food consump-
tion.
26 . Si ET
Page-31
sigfl

 

ANNEX B
Page-32
HHGUKE

USSR:GROWTH IN GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT, *X**?
IN INDUSTRY, AND IN AGRICULTURE,
fo 1956 - 1963

sr oe

   
 
  

 

 

GROSS NATIONAL
PRODUCT

 

 

 

 

 

 

1956 1957 1958 = 1959-1960 196119621963,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1961 1962 1963

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1962 1963
Page-33
ANNEX B
SEQRET —
USSR Figure 2

INDEXES OF NET AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION,
POPULATION, AND PRODUCTION OF BREAD
GRAINS (WHEAT AND RYE), 1950-63

 

140

 

 

 

 

1
i
/ al
—— Population '
1
eee Aericuitural Production
130 |— ——— Production of Bread _
Grains (Wheat and Rye) 1
1
t
t
1
1
i
120 :
1
t
1
i
1
1 /s
110 : fe
a;
1
1
t
1
100

 

INDEX| 1955 = 100

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

70 | | | | |
1950 1952 1954 1956 1958 1960 1962

50975 1-65 seghet

 

  

 

es aaemate
Page-34
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need t0 know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretory of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

<. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force «

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant. Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
opplicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-
sified: FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-35
SECRET
CONTROL DISSEM

SECRET
CONTROLI£D DISSEM