
Page-1
Soviet Military Capabilities
To Project Power and
Influence in Distant Areas

National Intelligence Estimate

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED :

“278
Page-2

Page-3
NIE 11-10-79

SOVIET MILITARY CAPABILITIES
TO PROJECT POWER AND
INFLUENCE IN DISTANT AREAS
Page-4
THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS,
EXCEPT AS NOTED IN THE TEXT.

‘The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the
Estimate:

The. Central Intelligence Agency, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State and Defense, and the National Security Agency.

Also Participating:
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force
Page-5
PREFACE

Since the mid-1950s the Soviets have strengthened and expanded
their influence in the Third World.* During the past three years the
USSR's arms sales and military assistance have been portrayed as having
entered a new stage with the introduction of Cuban combat forces in
Angola and Ethiopia. The magnitude of these interventions and their
success in furthering Soviet objectives have caused growing apprehen-
sion in the West, in China, and among some Third World leaders that
Moscow has embarked in Africa on a new, more assertive expansionist
policy with worrisome implications for other areas of the Third World.
The overriding concern is that the leading Western nations, wrestling
with the intricate and politically volatile issues of counteracting these
initiatives, will fail to meet this latest Soviet challenge and thereby
encourage Moscow to intensify and broaden its efforts. ~

This Estimate examines the substance and objectives of this Soviet
policy, reviews Soviet gains and losses to date, and analyzes overall
Soviet capabilities for distant operations across the full range of military
instrumentalities—from military aid, arms sales, and support of
insurgent movements to the use of friendly forces and the intervention
of Soviet combat units. The Estimate does not address Soviet options or
capabilities for military operations against specific countries except in
analysis at annex concerning hypothetical deployments to illustrate
Soviet airlift capabilities. The final chapter projects likely military
initiatives to extend Soviet influence in the Third World, future
development of Soviet forces for distant operations, and trends in Soviet
arms sales during the next five to 10 years.

At annex are a chronology of notable Soviet military actions in the
Third World since 1954, supplemental information on Soviet aid to
insurgent movements, and a brief discussion of Third World
perceptions of Soviet military power and the effect that Soviet military
assistance has on regional balances of forces.

Appended at the end of this Estimate is a foldout map (figure 10)
giving locations of places mentioned in the text.

Some figures in this Secret version of NIE 11-10-79 have been
updated to account for information that became available after the
original Top Secret edition was issued in February 1979.

“The term “Third World” refers to non-Communis, less developed countries, mast of which are
nonaligned.

[wow Page us Bieok]
Page-6
PREFACE ow...
EXEC!
DISCUSSION

CONTENTS

 

UTIVE SUMMARY

 

 

1. OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES ..............

A

B.
Cc.

Il. INSTRUMENTALITIES ....
AL
B.
Cc.

. Combat Support of Third World

. Aid to Insurgencies .......
. Use of Cuban and Other Friendly Forces.

: The Projection of Power and Influence

The Primacy of Military Force

 

 

Policy Appraisal ........

 

Military Sales to the Third World....
Military Training of Third World Personnel .......
Other Advisory Functions ....

Delivery, Assembly, and Maintenance of Military Equipment .
Construction of Military Facilities .
Military Intelligence Operations ..

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

Resupply ...
Combat Advisers and Forces ...

 

 

 

 

Cuba ....
Eastern Europe .
North Korea
Angola and Ethiopia .

  
  

UL. SOVIET ‘MILITARY FORCES AND CAPABILITIES FOR DISTANT

A.

B.

OPERATIONS ......

Soviet Forces Deployed in Distant Areas ...

 

 

Mediterranean
Indian Ocean..
South Atlantic
Caribbean .
Pacific Ocean

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

Soviet Forces Available for Deployment to Distant Areas

Naval Forces ....
Amphibious Forces
Naval Aviation
Frontal Aviation
Airborne Forces

 

 

Page
Page-7
C. Other Soviet Resources for Distant Operations .

 
  
 

 

Overseas Faci
Merchant Marine
Fishing Fleets ....

D. Capabilities for Distant Operations .

Military Airlifts ...
Blockade -
Intervention of Combat ‘Forces in a Local Conf
Airborne Assault Operations ...... -

Amphibious Assault Operations ......
Interdiction of Sea Lines of Communication
The Monetary Cost of Distant Operations ...

   

     

 

 

IV. OUTLOOK ....
A. Likelihood and Nature of Future Soviet Distant Operations ...

Areas of Operation .
Weaknesses and Alternatives
Reaction to Economie Problems .

B. Options for the Development. and Deployment of Forces for
Distant Operations

 

Navy .
Air Forces .

C. Future Military Sales and Assistance ....
ANNEX A: Selective Chronology of Events Related to Soviet Military
Activities in the Third World, 1954-78 ... sees
ANNEX B: Soviet Aid to Insurgent Movements in the Third World ........

 

ANNEX C: The Movement of Large Soviet Forces by Military Transport
Aviation—Hypothetical Deployments ... 7

ANNEX D: Third World Regional Perceptions of Soviet Military Power ..

 

vi

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page

38
38
38
39

39

39
40
40
41
42
42
42

44

44

44
46
47

 

58
62
Page-8
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Objectives

1. Soviet leaders continue to view the Third World as fertile
ground for the expansion of Soviet political, military, and economic
influence through an assertive and opportunistic policy. They see |
political conflict involving the use of military force or conducted in its
shadow as the main propellant of fundamental changes in the Third
World. They believe that military power will remain the cornerstone of
Soviet policy. Their primary objectives in aligning themselves
selectively with states and insurgent movements in. Third World
conflicts are to assert the USSR’s legitimacy as ideological vanguard of
world “national liberation” movements, to secure a major role in Third
World affairs, to affect the outcome of regional conflicts in favor of
Soviet interests, and to neutralize Western and Chinese political and
military influence. The Soviet leadership has no illusions, however,
about the difficulties of attaining these objectives.

2. While broad political objectives are paramount, the Soviets
pursue specific military objectives as well. These include acquisition of
overflight clearances and access to facilities abroad for supporting
military operations of Soviet as well as friendly forces, especially
emergency air and sea lifts of military equipment and supplies to Third
World states and insurgent forces. Overseas facilities also can ease the
logistic problems of operating naval forces at great distances from Soviet
waters. The Soviets deploy military forces in distant areas to show the
flag, to maintain a military presence that can be augmented relatively
quickly in time of crisis, and to monitor and, if necessary, counter the
operations of Western naval forces.

3. Objectives of a lower order in Soviet policy in the Third World
are to promote trade, to secure access to certain raw materials and
foods, and to be capable of restricting Western access to these materials,
Moscow's efforts to foster both military and economic dependence in
individual Third World countries go hand in hand, as the major
recipients of Soviet arms in 1978 also account for almost half of the
USSR’s nonmilitary trade with the Third World. Soviet economic aid
has not always resulted in a commensurate level of influence, nor do the -
Soviets. expect economic interests alone to buy much influence.

Policy Appraisal

4. The Soviets have undoubtedly gained from the expansion of
their military activity in the Third World. Soviet policymakers are

1
——-SEERET—
Page-9
SEGRE

probably persuaded that they have generally been on the right track,
and their most recent ventures in Angola and Ethiopia have surely:
reinforced that conviction. Soviet political influence has grown in some
countries at the expense of the West and China. Events in Angola and
Ethiopia have enhanced the USSR’s image as a great power capable of
projecting military force far from its shores. Military assistance to Africa
and the Middle East has demonstrated the value of Soviet support,
especially under emergency conditions. Moscow also has benefited from
the international perception that the military balance has changed, to ©
the detriment of the West, and from the seeming US reluctance to use
military force to counter the expansion of Soviet and Cuban presence in
the Third World.

5. Soviet military involvement in Third World conflicts has
evolved from military assistance programs, to occasional use of Soviet
forces in defensive roles, to the extensive use of Cuban combat forces.
The Cuban intervention in Angola and especially Ethiopia has probably
strengthened Soviet confidence in the feasibility and effectiveness’ of
this strategy, enhanced its appeal among political and military leaders
in both Moscow and Havana, and encouraged them to press this
strategy. Soviet and Guban leaders probably will believe that, as long as
such actions do not portray them as invaders and do not threaten the
West's allies or its sources of vital raw materials, the risk of Western
military involvement and escalation to a wider conflict will be slight.

6. The interdependent relationship between the USSR and Cuba is
complex, and both sides would probably find it difficult to determine at
this stage who has gained more from their joint military ventures. The
Cubans have worked closely with the Soviets, and Cuban involvement
in the Third World has served Soviet policy. The foremost advantage in
using Cubans or other friendly forces is the reduction in visibility of
Soviet involvement in Third World conflicts. It also allows Moscow to
exert influence in circumstances where Soviet forces would be

unwelcome.

7. Calculation of the risks in applying military force remains a
central feature of Soviet policy. The Angolan and Ethiopian ventures,
though dramatic in scale and noteworthy in their use of Cuban forces,
did not entail major risks for the Kremlin, but reflected Moscow's
assessment of African reactions, of political restraints on the United
States, and the availability of Cuban forces. Though the initial role of
the Soviets in Cuban military operations in Angola is not known, we
assume that the strategy and tactics employed were coordinated with
them. In Ethiopia, Moscow’s role was clearly more dominant from the

outset.
Page-10
—SECRER—

8. In the few instances where the Soviets have introduced their
own military forces into conflicts in the Third World, they did so to
assist friendly countries and to inhibit possible Western military
initiatives. In these cases, however, they have exercised a policy which
strictly limits the role of Soviet forces while at the same time accepting
measured risks of escalation.

— Their pilots and air defense units have engaged in combat, but
to date have not operated outside friendly territory.

— Soviet naval forces have established or augmented a presence in
the regions of conflict but have not engaged in combat.

— Airborne units have been placed on alert in a manner possibly
designed to bring pressure on the belligerents as well as the
United States. .

These activities illustrate Soviet appreciation for the utility of a show of
force and of implicit and explicit threats as a means of achieving policy
goals,

Instrumentalities

9. Arms transfers are by far the most widely employed of the
military means available to the Soviets for projecting influence in the
Third World. The Soviets have more than tripled the current dollar
amount of agreements and deliveries of military assistance to Third
World countries over the last five years. Where the bulk of a recipient's
military forces become equipped with Soviet weapons, dependence on
the USSR for advisers, spare parts, and newer equipment grows and in
time becomes a potential means of influencing the recipient's policies.
In practice, Moscow's efforts to exploit such dependence for this
purpose have had both successes and failures.

10. Third World nations continue to be lured by Soviet offers of
modern military equipment not usually available from other suppliers,
by long-term credits at low interest rates, often by lower prices, by.
payment (until recently) in local rather than hard currency, and by
quick delivery. Moscow is laying greater stress on the commercial
considerations of its arms sales to earn hard currency. Given these
factors, the market for Soviet arms remains fertile, and the trend in sales
is upward.

11. Through military training, advisory, and assistance programs
the Soviets attempt to create a base of enduring influence by fostering
extensive ties with Third World military personnel. Since 1955, some
44,000 have been trained in the USSR. About 11,000 Soviet military
advisers and technicians are currently stationed in Third World

3
SECRET
Page-11
SECRET
. countries. In recent years, suspicions of some Third World leaders about
¢ the motives behind Soviet military assistance programs have grown and

led to increasing reluctance by some to allow large numbers of Soviets
into their countries, Nevertheless, the number of Soviet military
advisers abroad has steadily increased.

12. Emergency resupply of high-priority military items by air and
sea is the most widely publicized form of Soviet combat support to
Third World states. In this regard, the USSR’s ability to provide large
Quantities of arms in a relatively short time is a major advantage. This
service carries little risk for the USSR because few Soviet personnel are
involved, they are not combatants, the deliveries are generally made to
areas remote from the fighting, and other countries are reluctant to
oppose such operations militarily. In addition, such resupply operations
do not necessarily commit the Soviets to deeper involvement.

18. A step higher on the ladder of involvement and risk is the
assignment of Soviet advisory personnel to Third World combat units,
Since 1967, when Soviet pilots flew combat missions against rebels in
North Yemen, Soviet personnel have seen actual combat in at least three
Third World countries—Egypt,: Syria, and Traq—and have played a
direct combat advisory role in two others—Angola and Ethiopia.

14. The USSR supports a number of insurgent movements in the
Third World, but the type and extent of this assistance vary. It is usually
channeled through third parties because insurgents normally do not *
operate where Moscow can provide direct aid and because the Soviets
may want to play down or conceal their role. By leaving the degree of
their support ambiguous, the Soviets gain freedom for political =
maneuvering.

15. East European states have provided a wide variety of military
equipment and experts to Third World nations and insurgent
movements, often in close cooperation with the USSR. While in most
cases this support has furthered Soviet objectives, the East Europeans
have had their own political and economic motives. The East European
governments have not committed combat troops in the Third World
and would be reluctant to do so.

16. Naval surface ships and submarines are the principal Soviet
military forces deployed in distance areas and are supplemented by
periodic deployments of naval aircraft. Although Soviet concerns over
potential strategic threats from Western carrier-launched airstrikes and -
submarine-launched ballistic missiles remain Prominent in Soviet
distant operations, the Navy continues to perform important missions
related to the projection of power.and influence in the Third World,
primarily by maintaining forces in regions of Soviet interest which can
be augmented relatively quickly in times of crisis.

4
SECRET
Page-12
Caen n ee eee ee ee

SECRET

17. We have no evidence of Soviet contingency plans to exert
political or economic pressure on the United States or its allies through
interdiction of sea lines of communication in the absence of a NATO-
Warsaw Pact war. The Soviets probably believe that such an operation
would lead to war with NATO.

18. In the principal areas of their normal deployments in distant
areas, Soviet diesel submarines and naval ships have access to a number
of ports for crew rest, replenishment, maintenance, and in some cases
major overhaul. Moscow is seeking additional access, but the only good |
prospects in the near term are in Angola, Ethiopia, South Yemen, and
Vietnam. Staging facilities for Soviet naval reconnaissance aircraft are
currently limited to Cuba, Angola, and South Yemen. Ethiopia also
probably will grant access for this purpose.

Intervention Capabilities

19. The Soviets have significant forces capable of intervention in
distant areas and have introduced forces into combat situations in
distant areas in the past. We believe that Soviet leaders in the future
would be willing under certain circumstances to use forces for this
purpose. Elements of all Soviet conventional forces—ground, air, and
naval—are potential resources for use in situations that call for
intervention. The deployment of a large segment of Soviet forces in
distant areas is constrained not only by the practical difficulties of
moving large forces over long distances but by the requirement, as
Moscow sees it, to retain the bulk of these forces in the USSR and
Eastern Europe in readiness for their primary mission of waging war _
with NATO or China. On the other hand, these factors would not
restrict the deployment of smaller units.

20. Where Cuban or other friendly forces are not available for use
in the Third World or are deemed unsuitable, Moscow would have the
option of using its own ground forces. Although Soviet air, naval, and air
defense forces have been involved in conflicts in the Middle East,
Angola, and Ethiopia, Soviet ground combat forces have not. Growing
Soviet self-confidence in projecting power and in the USSR’s role as a
global power will diminish whatever Soviet reluctance may have existed
in the past to employ ground forces outside the Warsaw Pact. At the
same time, there are limited situations in which allied forces would not
be preferable from a Soviet point of view; Afghanistan is one where the -
provision of limited Soviet ground forces in a hurry might well be
undertaken. Nevertheless, the Soviet leadership would probably view
the use of ground combat units, even in modest numbers, as a
significant escalation of Soviet involvement. The major constraints
would be concern over the likelihood of Western or regional

5
—SECRER
Page-13
"TTT TTT TTT Pee ee PP

— SECRET -

counteraction and the impact on Third World perceptions of Soviet
policy. We believe, therefore, that Moscow would employ ground:
combat units only where, and to the degree, it considered such action
essential to preserve vital Soviet interests in the region.

21. Over the next 10 years the Soviets will continue to make
modest improvements in amphibious lift, logistic support ships, naval
tactical air support, gunfire support, and airlift. Such improvements,
when added to current naval, airborne, naval infantry, and command
and control resources, will result in an increased ability to deploy forces
in distant areas and to come to the assistance of any ally. For example,
the Soviets might introduce an airborne or naval infantry unit at the
invitation of a government, particularly if Moscow believed there was
little danger of Western reaction and that the intensity of combat would
be low or the presence of an armed Soviet contingent would be
sufficient to accomplish Moscow’s objectives. Indeed, a single Soviet
airborne division is larger than the armies of many Third World states.

22. We believe, however, that the Soviets are unlikely to invade a
Third World country. They have never mounted an airborne assault or
amphibious assault operation in a distant area. Nevertheless, Soviet
forces have long been capable of undertaking such an operation against
the light opposition which could be expected in most areas, and the
above-projected improvements will expand this capability. But, over the
next decade the Soviets will still not have built the forces capable of
transporting, landing, and sustaining a large joint assault operation
against substantial opposition in the Third World.

Outlook

23. Policy. Although a change in the makeup of the top Soviet
leadership is highly probable in the next five years-and virtually certain
in the next 10, we do not believe that Soviet policies or long-term
objectives toward the Third World will change substantially for this
reason alone. We do not foresee the present or any likely future Soviet
leadership altering these objectives to secure short-term economic or
political benefits from the West. Although future Soviet leaders will
attach varying degrees of importance to detente relations with the
United States and other Western powers, we believe it unlikely that
Soviet leaders will be any more dissuaded from pursuing opportunities -
in the Third World in the future than in the recent past by concern over
adverse effects on detente. Indeed, Soviet leaders will probably
continue to calculate that major issues like the strategic arms limitation
talks will be largely unaffected and that costs in less critical areas of
US-Soviet relations will be bearable.

6
—SEGRET—
Page-14
—BEGRET—

24. Regional Prospects. We believe the Soviets will persist in a
steady course of creating and exploiting opportunities in distant areas,
utilizing wherever possible their comparative advantages in military
instruments of influence. They will continue to regard military
means—principally arms sales, military assistance, and support of
insurgent movements—as the most feasible way of bringing about the
changes they seck in the political structure of the Third World.

25. In Latin America, opportunities for expanding Soviet influence
through military means are less favorable than in other regions of the ~
‘Third World, with the exception of the continuing Soviet role in Cuba.
Although Moscow has designated Latin America as an arena for Soviet-
US competition and has made some economic and diplomatic inroads,
prospects are still limited. There will undoubtedly be incidents of unrest
and turmoil that should lend themselves to exploitation, but Soviet
efforts will be hampered by prevalent anti-Communist sentiments in
Latin America and by the USSR’s inability to provide the kinds of
nonmilitary assistance Latin Americans need. Most Latin American
governments are wary of Soviet overtures and concerned as much about
Soviet expansionism as about US. regional influence.

26.:[This paragraph of the earlier version of NIE 11-10-79
addressed Soviet military presence in Cuba. In view of events
related to this matter since issuance of the Estimate, the
paragraph has been deleted. The reader is directed to more
recent intelligence publications for information and judg-
ments on this subject.]

27. In South Asia, the Soviet outlook is somewhat brighter than in ==
Latin America. The Soviets are expanding their role in Afghanistan and
are maintaining close relations with India. India’s current government,
however, is not as well disposed toward the Soviets as its predecessor
and has begun seeking to make Indian foreign policy more genuinely
nonaligned by improving relations with both China and the West and
by reducing its dependence on the USSR for arms aid.

28. In Southeast Asia, Soviet support to Vietnam—and the
Friendship Treaty of November 1978—gave Hanoi significant external .
backing for its invasion of Kampuchea (Cambodia) in December 1978.
Nonetheless, Hanoi remains fiercely independent, and Soviet influence
in the region will remain largely dependent on Hanoi's sufferance.

29. In the Middle East, opportunities to expand Soviet influence
will depend, at least in the near term, mainly on the evolution of the
Arab-Israeli peace process and the course of events in Iran. Over the
long term, underlying antagonisms toward, and deepening suspicions of,
Moscow’s motives will qualify Soviet prospects. Soviet opportunities

7
—SECRET—
Page-15
a
—SEERET—

could greatly improve, however, if peace negotiations in the Middle
East fail, raising the likelihood of renewed hostilities. As a result of the
instability in Iran, the Soviets undoubtedly anticipate significant
changes there and in the conservative regimes of the Persian Gulf area
that will lead to opportunities for new Soviet ties with the oil-producing
states and to further reduction of Western influence.

30. The best opportunities for the USSR will lie in Africa, where
political instability is commonplace and where conditions that promote
subversion and insurgencies will remain rife.

31. Preservation of Influence. This will remain the overriding
problem in Soviet efforts to project power and influence in the Third
World through military means. Even where Soviet influence is
strongest, it is vulnerable to unpredictable changes in the local political
leadership or in its attitudes. Nationalist-minded statés will continue to
resent the arrogant behavior and thinly veiled prejudice often displayed
by Soviet representatives. Many Third World leaders will remain
suspicious of Soviet motives and probably would be reluctant clients of
the USSR. Those who do accept Soviet assistance can be expected to
react against instances of exploitative military agreements, poor-quality
assistance and training, and interference in internal affairs.

82. To preserve Soviet influence in a country where, for example,
dependence on Soviet military support has diminished or expulsion of
Soviet personnel is threatened, Moscow has essentially three alternatives
beyond the continuation of present policies:

— Use friendly outside forces more extensively to carry out i
Moscow's policies.

 

— Seek to acquire through Soviet advisers sufficient control of the
military and internal security forces to prevent the leaders of
the client state from taking actions inimical to Soviet interests.

— Garrison Soviet troops in the client state, at its invitation,
ostensibly to protect the state against some external threat but in"
reality to preserve in power a government that is friendly and
beholden to Moscow and that will enforce policies in line with
Soviet interests.

33. The last alternative would have unforeseeable ramifications
for Soviet foreign relations, but it is nonetheless an option that
conceivably could attract serious consideration by Soviet decision-
makers. The deployment of Soviet forces for this purpose, however,
would be a drastic departure from the policy Moscow has followed in
the Third World.
Page-16
— SECRET

34. Despite Soviet difficulties in preserving political influence in
most Third World countries, Moscow will have ample opportunities to
play a major role. Soviet policy in the Third World feeds on political
turbulence, military conflict, and civil strife. During the next 10 years
these disruptions are likely to recur, especially in Africa and the Middle
East, and the major role the Soviets have effectively played—a source of
arms and military assistance and a protector of clients—will remain
relevant to the needs of many countries.

 

fb 7
Lies age is Ble
Page-17
DISCUSSION

|. OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES

A.. The Projection of Power and Influence

1. Soviet leaders continue to view the Third World
as fertile ground for the expansion of Soviet political,
military, and economic influence. The United States
and China are seen as the main opponents of- this
expansion. The primary objectives in aligning the
Soviet Union with states and insurgent movements in
Third World conflicts are to assert the USSR’s legiti-
macy as ideological vanguard of world “national
liberation” movements, to secure a major role in Third
World affairs, to affect the outcome of regional con-
flicts in favor of Soviet interests, and to neutralize
Western and Chinese political and military influence.

 

2. Soviet leaders have no illusions about the im-
mense difficulties of attaining these objectives, but
neither are they in any particular hurry, for they
remain convinced—or at least conditioned by Soviet
ideology to believe—that time and history are on their
side. Although they see their struggle with the United
States as rooted in ideology, they view its practical
manifestations in terms of territory, in which the tide
of battle is measured in political control and influence.
Their struggle, moreover, is relentless, pursued aggres-
sively where conditions permit, but patiently when
resistance stiffens. Setbacks, which they view as the
inevitable accompaniment of a forward policy, do not
deter them from pursuing long-term objectives.

3. Soviet policy constantly seeks through exhorta-
tion, covert action, and the coordinated application of
diverse means to exploit opportunities for expanding
Soviet power in the Third World, securing new beach-
heads of influence and continuing to press the limits of
Soviet power projection. Soviet policy therefore is both
assertive and opportunistic, exploiting and manipulat-
ing events and situations over which Moscow has little
or no control and vigorously pursuing competitive
advantages where circumstances permit.

4. While broad political objectives are paramount,
the Soviets pursue specific military objectives as well.
These include acquisition of overflight clearances and
access to facilities abroad from which they can support

VW
—SEERET—

military operations of Soviet as well as friendly forces,
especially emergency air and sea lifts of “military
equipment and supplies to Third World states and
insurgent forces. The Soviet Navy wants overseas
facilities that can ease the logistic problems of operat-
ing naval forces at great distances from Soviet waters.
The Soviets deploy military forces—naval and naval
air—in distant areas to promote and defend the
USSR’s interests abroad: protecting the maritime and
fishing fleets, asserting Soviet rights on the high seas,
demonstrating Soviet military might through port

-visits, affirming Moscow's support of Third World

governments, and even in some cases assisting the
combat operations of friendly forces. They also collect
intelligence and attempt to monitor and, if necessary,
counter the operations of Western naval forces, espe-
cially aircraft carriers and ballistic missile submarines
capable of conducting nuclear strikes on the Soviet
homeland. Soviet leaders believe that the presence of
their naval forces, by serving as a visible symbol of
Soviet concern and military capability, also inhibits
Western military initiatives in areas of the Third
World during periods of tension.

5. Objectives of a lower order in Soviet policy in the
Third World are to promote trade and to secure access
to certain raw materials and foods in short supply in
the USSR. At present the USSR’'s needs for most Third
World mineral resources are limited to a few critical
items such as the bauxite it imports in large quantities
from Guinea and phosphates it will import from
Morocco over the next 30 years. The Soviets already
have tried to ensure new, though limited, sources of oil
through development assistance to. Iraq's and Syria's
oil industries and are expected to view access to
foreign petroleum sources in the future as an ever
more crucial strategic factor. (See the discussion in
chapter IV, beginning with paragraph 145;-on the
possible impact of future Soviet oil requirements on
the course of Moscow's policy toward the Third
World).

6. In addition, just as Moscow through military
assistance seeks to make nations dependent on the
Page-18
—SECRER

USSR for their military security, so it attempts through
a variety of means to foster economic dependence.
These two efforts go hand in hand, as the major
recipients of Soviet arms in 1978 also accounted for
nearly half of Soviet nonmilitary trade with the Third
World. Moscow also seeks to create the capability to
control, disrupt, or deny Western access to raw materi-
als in the Third World. This capability could be
exercised, primarily during periods of international
tension, to disrupt Western economies or to pressure
Western governments to grant political concessions.
All of these efforts serve the same ultimate end—to
influence political actions, making them responsive to
Moscow's direction.

B. The Primacy of Military Force

7. Soviet leaders see military force, augmented by
persistent diplomatic and political efforts, as the main
propellant of fundamental changes in the Third
World. Military strength is crucial not only in exploit-
ing future opportunities to extend Soviet influence, but
also in preserving past gains. It is the foundation of the
USSR’s status as a global superpower and will remain
through the coming decade the key to Soviet behavior
in the world arena. Indeed, in the past few years,
military assistance and support to friendly forces have
become demonstrably effective forms of projecting
Soviet influence abroad. Moreover, the Soviets believe
that the growth of their military power has permitted
them to pursue a more assertive policy in the Third
World.

8. Soviet military involvement in Third World con-
flicts has evolved gradually from dependence on
military assistance programs in the 1950s, to occasional
use of Soviet forces in strictly defensive roles in the
1970s, and more recently to extensive use of Cuban
combat forces for intervention. Calculation of the
risks, however, in applying military force in the Third
World remains a central feature of Soviet policy and
was not vitiated by the actions in Angola and Ethiopia.
Those two ventures, though dramatic in scale and
noteworthy in their use of Cuban forces, did not entail
major risks for the USSR but instead reflected the
Soviet assessment of African reactions, political re-
straints on US involvement in foreign conflicts, and the
availability of Cuban forces.

9. Moscow on a few occasions has introduced Soviet
military forces into conflicts in the Third World to
assist friendly countries and to inhibit possible West-

- ern military initiatives. In doing so, however, it has
exercised a policy which strictly limits the role of

12
SECRET

Soviet forces while at the same time accepting meas-
ured risks of escalation.

— Soviet pilots and air defense units have engaged
in combat, but to date have not operated outside
friendly territory.

— Soviet naval forces have established or augmented. -
a presence in the regions of conflict but have not
engaged in combat.

— Airborne units have been placed on alert in a
manner possibly designed to bring pressure on
the belligerents as well as the United States.

These .activities illustrate Soviet appreciation for the
utility of show of force and implicit and explicit’
threats as means toward the realization of policy goals.

C. Policy Appraisal

10. Frequent Soviet appraisals of the international
balance of political power contend that the “correla-
tion of forces” since 1945 has shifted steadily in favor
of the USSR. They note that the decline and demise of
the colonial system gave rise to large numbers of
independent nonaligned states in the Third World. +
Furthermore, many former Western colonies have
chosen noncapitalist forms of development and
aligned themselves with the “socialist camp,” which
now comprises greater human and material resources
than ever before. Soviet policymakers are probably
persuaded by this appraisal that they have generally
been on the right track, and their most recent ventures
in Angola and Ethiopia have surely reinforced that ~~
conviction.

11. Although the USSR has suffered a number of
reversals, such as expulsion from Egypt and Somalia
and the consequent loss of access to valuable military
facilities, Soviet leaders, as far as we know, have not
viewed these setbacks as grounds for a fundamental
reappraisal of their policy toward the Third World. In
general, they probably would attribute these reversals
not to the policy but to events beyond their control or
to unfortunate miscalculations such as their apparent
belief that Sadat could be bullied in 1971 into support-
ing Egyptian programs along lines dictated by
Moscow. _

12. Soviet economic efforts in the Third World
have been modest and selective but have achieved
important returns due largely to military sales.

— Soviet trade with the Third World grew from
$2.8 billion in 1969 to $9.4 billion in 1976 and
Page-19
SECRET

$12.2 billion in 1977. (Only 40 percent of the
growth reflects expansion in real terms.) Military
hardware accounted for 40 percent of Soviet
exports in 1977 and for most of the sizable
earnings in hard currency, which totaled $800
million in 1976 and an estimated $1.2 billion in
1977.

— The number of Third World countries trading
with the USSR has also risen, from 26 in 1955 to
nearly 80 at the present time.

13. The USSR, however, cannot seriously challenge
Western economic predominance in the Third World
and in the nonmilitary sector is losing ground, al-
though it has gained access to new fishing waters and
certain raw materials and food. Although nonmilitary
trade rose steadily (in current year prices) from $1.8
billion in 1971 to $4.7 billion in 1975, it has dipped
somewhat since then to $4.1 billion in 1976 and $3.8
billion in 1977. More important, the Soviet share of
total Third World trade (excluding arms sales) has not
only been insignificant—normally less than 2 per-
cent—but fell sharply in 1976 and 1977,' and Soviet
nonmilitary trade with Third World countries has
declined as a share of total Soviet trade with non-’
Communist countries. (See figure 1.)

 

14. In contrast, Soviet pledges of economic aid to
Third World countries over the past five years have
totaled more than $5 billion, as compared with $3.5
billion in the preceding five years. Soviet economic aid
deliveries over these six years have averaged about
$500 million annually. Also, there was a sharp increase
in economic aid relative to military aid in 1978 (see
figure 2). However, Soviet economic aid has not
always resulted in a commensurate level of influence,
nor do the Soviets expect economic interests alone to
buy much influence.

15. The Soviets have undoubtedly gained from the
expansion of their military activity in the Third
World. Indeed, the policy has established a Soviet

‘Data for 1978 trade were not available for inclusion in this
Estimate.

military and economic presence in some Third World
countries and has enabled the Soviets to exercise some
influence over the course of events there. Moscow has
expanded its political influence in some countries at
the expense of the West and, to a lesser extent, the
People’s Republic of China. The interventions in
Angola and Ethiopia have enhanced the USSR's image
as a great power capable of projecting military force
far from its shores and demonstrated the feasibility of
using Cuban forces. The military assistance to Africa
and the Middle East has demonstrated the value of
Soviet support, especially under emergency conditions.
The fact that Soviet involvement in Ethiopia was
limited to countering the Somali invasion has probably
allayed some African fears of Soviet intentions. Mos-
cow has also benefited from the international percep-
tion that the military balance has changed, to the
detriment of the West, and from the seeming US
reluctance to use military force to counter the expan-
sion of Soviet and Cuban presence in the Third World.

 

 

 

16. Despite its successes, Soviet policy suffers from

a number of vulnerabilities which have contributed to
the setbacks in the USSR’s relations with the Third
World. The policy has persistently underestimated the
power of nationalism as a counter to the expansion of
Soviet influence. Third World states deeply resent the
arrogant, secretive, heavyhanded behavior of Soviet
representatives and advisers, whose thinly veiled prej-
udice against, and contempt of, Third World peoples
and cultures, especially black African, is sharply felt.
The policy also has misjudged the resentment and
suspicion that are mounting among Third World
leaders against Soviet motives and has overestimated
the potential of military assistance as a mechanism of
control over Third World political leaders. Moreover,
the policy falters where economic considerations be-
come the priority interest of Third -World nations.
These factors often combine to undermine the.
achievement of Soviet policy goals and make the
preservation of Soviet influence once achieved the
most pressing problem facing the Soviet leadership in
its efforts to project power and influence in the Third
World through military means.
Page-20
Trade Between the USSR and the Third World, 1971-77

Soviet Share of Third World Trade#

 

 

Figure 1

Third World Share of Soviet Trades.

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.0 Percent 22 Percent -
25 20 \ A
20 \ 18 XJ \ .
1s 16 \
10 4 X
0.5 12

pips sp tr potir yp py
° 197172 73 74 75 76 77 to 197172 73 74 75 76 77

*Excludes arms sales. ‘

Unclassified bExcludes trade with Communist countries.
Saoren

 

 

Value of Soviet Military and Economic
Aid to Less Developed Countries, 1969-78

Deliveries

5.0 Billion US $
(annual average)

45

=

40

Economic

  

 

 
  
 
   

Agreements

5.0 Billion US-S
{annual average)

ae Economic

 

  
  

35

° "4969 70 “74
~Geeret~

reece 379
Page-21
I INSTRUMENTALITIES

A. Military Sales to the Third World

17. Arms transfers are by far the most widely
employed of the military means for projecting Soviet
influence in the Third World. What began as a
low-key military aid effort in 1955, governed largely
by political considerations and soft financial terms, has
mushroomed into a massive aid and sales program (see
tables 1 and 2) paying Moscow important political and
commercial dividends. Sales expanded from $220

million a year in the initial period of the program
(1955-58), to more than $1 billion in 1970, over $4
billion in 1974, and over $5 billion in 1977 (these
dollar values are not adjusted for inflation), Moscow's
ability to move quickly in exploiting new opportuni-
ties has given it a 16-percent slice of the Third World
arms market in the past four years. Only the United
States has sold more military goods to Third World
buyers. As a universal staple in the world marketplace,
arms have opened the door to wider Soviet relations

Table 1

Soviet Military Assistance to Third World Countries, 1956-78

Million US Dollacs*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

  

 
 
  
  

 

 
  
 

 

Total 1956-67 1968-72 1973-78
Agreements Deliveries Agreements Deliveries Agreements Deliveries Agreements Deliveries
North Africa 4461 3,674 258 238 22h 11 3.982, 3.285
Algeria 1,881 1,5, 245 225 100 63 1,536 857
Libya 2,506 2,498 - - 121 88 2,385 2410
Moroceo........ 4 31 13 13 . _ 61 18
Sub-Saharan Africa 3,136 2,743 8 70 219, 187 2,836 2,516
Angola... 922 369 - _ - - 922 369
Benin . 10 10 - _ - - 10 10
Burundi 5 2 - = Neal - 5 2
Cameroon ..... 7 Neel Neel Neel Neg! Neel Neg! - Neg!
Cape Verde . 4 3 = - - - 4 3
Central African
Republic 8 3 - - 2 2 6 1
Chad ... 7 5 - - - - 7 S
Congo .......... 64 8 2 2 12 6 50 20
Equatorial Guinea 9 9 - _ 2 2 7 7
Ethiopia 1,556 1,306 - _ 6 4 1,550 1,902
Gambia Negt Neg! - - - - Negl Negl
Chana . 10 10 10 10 - - ~ -
Cuinea . 69 70 uN 10 15 Ts 43 46
Guinea-Bissau... rn W - = - — " uM
Kenya ......... Negi Neg! - - Negl Neg!
Madagascar 63. 5 - - - - 6 5
Mali 60 87 4 4 4 1 52 82
Mozambique 61 106 - _ - - 61 106
Nigeria... 101 90 5 5 2 20 1s 65
Seychelles 2 2 —- - - - 2 2
Sierra Leone. Negl Negl - - Neg! Neg! - 7
Somalia .. 329 329 35 30 nu 37 223 262
Sudan .. 87 cy = _ 8s 69 2 1S
Tanzania 238 89 2 2 - Neg! 236 87
Uganda . 96 102 12 1 - 1 84 94
Zambia 24 23 - - 1 1 23 22
Footnote at end of table.
15
— SECRET
Page-22
SECRET
Table 1
Soviet Military Assistance to Third World Countries, 1956-78
(Continued)
a = ; Million US Dollars*
Total 1 1968-72 1973-78

 

 

 

Agreements Deliveries Agreements — Deliveries

 

      

East Asia 89 _, 885 BBA 873
Burma Negl Neg! - -
Indonesia 478 872 878 869
Kampuchea (Cambodia) 13 13 6 4

Latin Americas 655 630 _ —
Colombia Negl Negl _ -
Peru 655 630 -— + oe

Middle East 14.410 13,604 2.644 2,126
Cyprus 18 18 18 18
Eayot ... 4,067 4,057 1,335 1,205
Iran 1,370 722 150 25
Iraq 3,931 4,006 644 455,
Kuwait . 51 51 - -
Lebanon ....... 4 4 -
North Yemen 0. 14 121 70
South Yemen . 288 318 =
Syris 4867 4307 427

South Asia... 4.265 3827 Lug oe 2a 1 2iT iLU3
Afghanistan 926 691 348 205 107
Bangladesh ... 73 56 - = 63
India... 3,204 2,537 826 565 146
Maldive Islands Nee! Nedl Neel - Neel
Nepal I 1 - ~ Negl
Pakistan 48 29 3 3 23
Sri Lanka . . 13, 13 = = 2

 

 
 

Total

*Not adjusted for inflation.

   

 

Table 2

Soviet Military Assistance to Selected Communist Countries, 1956-78
on Million US Dollars*

 

 

 

 

 

     
   

 

 

Total 1956-67 1968-72 1973-78
Agreements Deliveries Agreements De! Agreements Deliveries Agreements Deliveries
Cuba .... 1,635 1,668 ™m 199 199 659 692
L908 cei 71 1 4 _ - 73 oT
North Korea 1,617 1,617 155 543 543 319 319
Vietnam .. 3,204 3,194 1,220 1,960- 1,360 624 ~ _ 614
Total 6533 «6,550 2,756 2102 2,102 1675 1,692
Total With Assistance to :
Third World Countries 34,951 31413 7,800 6,836 7,285 6,131 19,266 18,446
*Not adjusted for inflation.
+ “Seeret-
Page-23
eR RS

—SECREE

with countries like Peru that have few political affin-
ities with the USSR and to which the USSR has few if
any other entrees, and they provide direct access to
the recipient's military establishment—the fulcrum of
power in most Third World countries.

18. Where the bulk of a recipient's military forces
are equipped with Soviet weaponry, dependence on
the USSR for advisers, spare parts, and newer equip-
ment grows and in time becomes a potential means of
influencing the recipient's policies by threatening to
curtail or even cut off the supply. Leaders of many
countries hang their political survival and their inter-
national image on assured weapon flows. In practice,
Moscow's efforts to exploit such dependence have had
both successes and failures.

19. Third World nations continue to be lured by
Soviet offers of modern military equipment not usually
available from other suppliers, by long-term credits at
low interest rates, often by lower prices, by payment
(until recently) in local rather than hard currency, and
by quick delivery. Given these factors, the market for
Soviet arms remains fertile, and the trend in sales is
upward.

20. Moscow is laying greater stress than before on
the commercial considerations of its arms sales. We
know of few concessions given to important customers
in the past year or so either in pricing arrangements or
repayment terms. Libya paid cash. Even Syria no
longer receives discounts and is believed to be paying
for most of its arms purchases in hard currency
provided by Arab oil producers. Iraq is paying in
crude oil, natural gas, and hard currency for deliveries
under its order in 1976 for more than $1 billion worth
of equipment. It should be noted,. however, that
Moscow will make significant concessions on payment
terms when refusal to do so might jeopardize Soviet
interests. In Ethiopia's case, for example, Moscow has
discounted the price of the arms delivered.

21. In general, Soviet exports of more advanced
weapon systems to Third World nations have not
begun until Soviet forces have been equipped with the
successor systems. The Soviets as a matter of policy
have been reluctant to export their most advanced,
high-performance military aircraft because of the
difficulties in training Third World pilots to fly them
and the danger of compromising the capabilities of the
aircraft and the level of their technology.

22. The USSR does not produce a wholly separate
line of military equipment for export. In some cases,

however, the Soviets manufacture export versions of
their hardware that do not include all of the weapons,
avionics, or ancillary equipment (such as bomb deliv-
ery devices) provided on weapon systems for Soviet
use. In other cases, moreover, production of equip-
ment for export has continued even though - Soviet
units no longer procure this equipment. Also, some
weapon systems like the T-54 tank that have been
retired from active Soviet inventories have been recon-
ditioned for export. :

23. Moscow usually insists that arms buyers submit
their requirements for equipment and spares a year in
advance so that production schedules can be adjusted.
Some of these orders are met from !arge Soviet stocks.
Where the orders impinge on already taut production
schedules, the Soviets sometimes draw out deliveries
beyond the usual 12 to 18 months. But they retain the
capability to deliver large quantities of military equip-
ment rapidly by dipping into the equipment reserves
of Soviet units. T-62 tanks in storage in a tank division
in the Kiev Military District reportedly were shipped
to the Middle East in the fall of 1978, and that
division's reserve stocks were later refilled with T-64s.

B. Military Training of Third World Personnel

24. Since 1955 a total of some 44,000 military
personnel from Third World countries have received
training in the Soviet Union (see table 3). Training is
also conducted in Third World states, thereby reduc-
ing for the Soviets the administrative, logistical, and
security problems that attend the entry of large num-
bers of forcigners into the Soviet Union. Both the in-
country and the USSR-based programs, in addition to
providing military training, are intended to extend
Soviet influence in Third World countries, to cultivate
pro-Soviet sentiments among client military personnel,
and to identify controllable individuals and factions
that can be exploited to serve Soviet interests.

25. The ever-growing complexity of modern weap-
ons has enabled the Soviets over the years to send large
numbers of advisers to client countries in the Third
World, where about 11,000 Soviet advisers and techni-
cians now provide instruction on the full range of
Soviet equipment, serve as instructors in client mili-
tary institutions, and supervise military exercises (see
table 4). Soviet military advisers are often in poten-
tially good positions to influence political attitudes
because of the teacher-student situations in which they
generally work and the broad access they frequently
have to influential client officials. Some Soviet advisers

~SECREF-
Page-24
SECRET

Table 3
Military Personnel From Third World Countries Trained in Communist Countries, 1955-78 *

Number of Persons

 

 

     

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
     

 

   

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

  

1955-78 . . 1978
Eastern Eastern
USSR Europe China Europe China .-
North Africa 3.385 335, _15 mal a4
Algeria 2,045 200 1S _ a
Libya . 1,265 6S - 40 _
Morocco 5 70 - - ~
Sub-Saharan Africa 13,790 10,035 1,065 2.690 iss 35
Angola 60 55 5 - s . 5 _
Benin 7 20 20 cae - ~ _— _ _
Botswana “10 7 = 10 i -. 7 7
Burundi. 75 18 _ — - = - _
Cameroon ........ 195 = - 125 _ — _
Chad . 105 105 _ = - _ - =
Congo 855 355 8S 415 - cam _-
Equatorial Guinea 200 200 _ - — - - _
Ethiopia 1,640 1,190 450 = 1,050 900 150 -
Ghana 180 180 _ = _ - - - *

Guinea .. 1,290 870 60 360 10 10 - -
Guinea-Bissau 100 100 - - - - - -
Madagascar 30 90 -. = 30 30 - -
415 355 10 50 s 5 - -

465 385 30 50 4s, 4s - -

730 695 35 - 150 150 - -

150 - = 150 _ - - a

2,585, 2,395, 160 30 - - _- -

550 330 20 200 - - - _

2,855, 1,820 10 1,025 295 295 -_ _

55 = - 55 - — - -

990 790 200 - 5 5 - -

17S - _- 175, 25 _ - 2s

P 130 85 ~ 45 — - - =

East Asia . 9,00 1,590 1710 = = = = =
Indonesia . 9,270 7,560 17h - - - - —
Kampuchea (Cambodia) 30 30 - - _ - - -
Latin America 725 725 _100 _100 = =
Peru... 125 725 _ - 100 100 - -
15,650 2,485, = 1,030 380 650 =

5,665 585 =— — - - -

315 - - -_ - -. _
3,650 - 250 100 150 -.

1,180 - 10 10 - -

South Yemen 1,095 1,075 20 - 170 170 - -
4945 3,745 1,200 - 600 100 500 =
12286425870. ee — + 2B

Afghanistan 4,010 3,725 285 _ = _ —
Bangladesh 485, 445 - 23 - =_ 2
India .. 2,285 2,200 85 _ = _ -—
Pakistan .. 430 45 ® . . . as
Set Lanka —15  ___10 — — = = =.
Total. 52,890 43,790 5,965, 3,195, 2,820 1,925. us 150

 

 

 

* Data refer to the estimated number of persons departing for training. Numbers are rounded to the nearest five.
© Number of personnel being trained Is not available,
—Seeret
- 18
SECRET
Page-25
SECRET

Table 4

Soviet and East European Military Advisers and
Technicians in the Third World, 1978*

 

___East European

North Africa... .... 2,310

 

  

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

  
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

Algeria 1,000
Libya .. 1,300 450
Morocco . 10
Sub-Saharan Afri 3,300. 51S.
Angola .. 1,000 300
Renin 30 _
Botswana 5 -
Burundi... 5 —
Cape Verdi .......... 50 15
Central African
Empire 25 =
Chad .. 20 -
Congo 50 10
Equatorial Cuinea 40 -
Ethiopia . 1,800 100
Guinea 100 _
Guinea-Bissau 6S -
10 -
180 -
230 -
10 =
120 5
50 5
10 80
Latin America ___150 _
Peru ... 150 =
Middle East 4,160 335.
Tran s -
Iraq 1,100 100
Kuwait 5 -
North Yemen 150 5
South Yemen .. 500 50
Syria 2,400 180
South Asia 850 =
Afghanistan 700 -
India .. _

 

z

Total .. 10,770. -

 

 

*Minimum number present for one month or more.

—Seereh

are active at the highest levels of the host military
establishments. Moreover, they can spot talented and
politically impressionable individuals and single them
out for special instruction and political indoctrination
in the USSR, .where training of foreigners stresses
Marxist-Leninist ideology.

26. In recent years, suspicions of some Third World
leaders about the motives behind Soviet military assist-

ance programs have grown and led to increasing
reluctance by some to permit large numbers of Soviets
into their countries, and in some cases both their access
to facilities and their contacts with indigenous person-
nel have been restricted. Some major aid recipients -
have contended that the Soviets intentionally slow
down their training and purposely introducé” more
sophisticated equipment from time to time as a means
of justifying a continued large Soviet presence. The
Soviets, in fact, use a number of schemes to perpetuate
and enlarge their presence. For example, they some-
times refuse to provide technical manuals for equip-
ment, thereby making the host dependent on Soviet
technicians. Despite the suspicions and resistance of
Third World leaders, however, there has been a steady
increase in recent years in the number of Soviet

advisers abroad.

C. Other Advisory Functions

27. Aside from their combat support role (see para-
graphs 31-83), military advisers and technicians per-
form other functions that contribute to the accom-
plishment of Soviet objectives. These functions fall
within three general categories.

Delivery, Assembly, and Maintenance of Military

Equipment

28. Because most Soviet equipment guarantees are
not valid unless the equipment is maintained by Soviet
specialists* during the one- or two-year guarantee
period, a substantial number of Soviet military person-
nel abroad are involved in this activity.

Construction of Military Facilities

29. A large number of Soviet specialists are in-
volved under military aid agreements in the planning,
supervision, and construction of military airfields,
electronic installations, and military training centers.

Military Intelligence Operations

30. The full extent of Soviet support of client
military intelligence activities is not known, nor is it
clear whether such assistance fs performed under
military aid agreements or through separate contracts.

 

"These personne! are called “guarantors,” a term that In Sovict
internal administrative usage has come to refer to all Soviet military
personnel abroad acting in an advisory capacity except those
directly engaged in combat or those who could be by virtue of their
duties, The latter are called “combat advisers,” discussed in para-
graph 33.

—SEEREF—
Page-26
—SEERET—

The Soviet investment in this area of foreign military

assistance is small in comparison with the other activi-...

ties discussed above and probably earns small returns
in increased influence, though it may provide access to
client intelligence services. The USSR certainly has
benefited from the activities of East German and
Czechoslovak intelligence advisers in such countries as
Somalia, Ethiopia, Angola, and Mozambique.

D. Combat Support of Third World Clients

31. The USSR has provided its clients a range of
services and combat support that have incrementally
increased the level of Soviet involvement in Third
World conflicts short of engaging Soviet personnel in
operations that would risk entanglement with another
major power.

Resupply

32. The most widely publicized form of Soviet
combat support to Third World states is the. emer-
gency resupply of high-priority items of military
equipment by air and sea lift. This service carries
relatively little’ risks for the Soviet Union as the
number of Soviet personnel involved is relatively
small, they are not combatants, the deliveries are
made in the rear areas remote from the fighting, and
other countries have been reluctant to oppose such
operations militarily. In addition, such resupply oper-
ations do not necessarily commit the Soviets to deeper
involvement. The Soviets are capable of mounting
resupply operations on short notice and can be ex-
pected to do so again.

Combat Advisers and Forces

83. A step higher on the ladder of involvement. and
risk is the assignment of Soviet advisory personnel to
Third World combat units, principally to assist in
command and control functions but also logistics and
other support activities. Soviet leaders recognize the
risks and limitations involved in using combat forces
and have acted with restraint. Yet since 1967, when
Soviet pilots flew combat missions against rebels in
North Yemen, Soviet personnel have seen actual com-

bat in at least three Third World countries—Egypt, °

Syria, and Iraq—and have played a direct combat
advisory role in two others—Angola and Ethiopia.

See annex A for a chronology of Soviet involvement In and
support of combat operations in the Third World over the past 20

years.

20

E. Aid fo Insurgencies

34. The Soviet Union supports a number of insur-
gent movements in the Third World, but the type and
extent of this assistance vary, as do the methods of
providing it. This aid ranges from propaganda support
to arms and other material assistance. The USSR.-
seldom supplies financial backing, preferring to send
material which is often paid for with money donated
by other sources. While the Soviets maintain direct
contact with some insurgent groups, they usually
channel their material support through third parties,
chiefly for. two reasons:

— First, most insurgent groups operate in remote
areas far from main ports and air terminals.
Supplies must therefore be trucked overland,
sometimes through rugged terrain, in countries
where the Soviets do not control the resources
necessary for such transport. Reliance on third
parties—normally, cooperative governments
neighboring the countries where the insurgent
movements are active—is therefore essential,

— Second, Moscow may wish to conceal or at least
play down its support of an insurgent movement.
The extent to which the Soviets want to be
identified with an insurgent group depends on _
the political context in which it operates, the
chances of its success, the risks involved for the
Soviets, and the legitimacy of the cause, both
from the Soviet perspective and as more gener-
ally perceived. Moscow's assessment of these
variables determines the nature and degree of its
support. By leaving the degree of their support
ambiguous, the Soviets gain freedom for political
maneuvering.‘

F. Use of Cuban and Other Friendly Forces

35. The foremost advantage in using Cuban or other
friendly forces to further Soviet objectives in Third
World conflicts is that they reduce the visibility of
Soviet interest and involvement. They allow Moscow
to extend its influence into areas where Soviet military
presence on the scale needed to achieve desired results
would either be unwelcome to friendly forces in the
areas of the conflict and generate hostility. and_resent-
ment, or be denounced by Third World governments
and even opposed with outside military forces. Where
large contingents of Soviet forces might-cause alarm in

“Soe annex B for background on the nature and status of Sovict
aid to Insurgencles in the Middle East, North Africa, Sub-Saharan
Africa, Asia, and Latin America.

—SEEREH—
Page-27
—SEEREF—

the West and the Third World, allied forces such as
the Cubans appear much less menacing. Friendly
forces also serve a useful propaganda function in
support of Soviet policy in the international forum.

Cuba

36. The Cubans have worked closely with the
Soviets; their relationship has in most cases been a
matter of Moscow assisting a partner already willing to
help but not fully able to do so for financial or
logistical—not political—reasons. The interdependent
relationship between the two governments’ policies is
complex, and both sides would probably find it diffi-
cult to determine at this stage who has gained more
from their joint military ventures. In this regard Cuba
is by no means an entirely independent actor, given its
economic and military dependence on the Soviet
Union, but Castro, if he chose, could refuse to accom-
modate Moscow's need of allied military forces to
pursue its policies in the Third World.

37. Cuba has benefited greatly from its close cooper-
ation with the Soviets in their overseas actions. While
Castro has long been a staunch advocate of aggressive
action against the “reactionary forces” of imperialism,
his impact as the representative of a small country
would be negligible without “Soviet support. That
backing has increased his prestige and influence in the

- Third World. Moreover, Castro clearly believes that

Cuba's actions are of value to the USSR and have:
provided Cuba with greater influence in dealing with
Moscow. He probably views the increased Soviet
military and economic assistance to Cuba since 1975 in
this light. In addition to the recent delivery of Cuba's
first submarine—an F-class diesel-powered attack
unit—Moscow has provided some firstline weapons,
including MI-8 Hip-E combat assault-helicopters and
recently MIG-23 Flogger fighter-bombers. These
weapons will improve Cuban combat capabilities and
most could be employed in distant areas.

38. Between 85,000 and 39,000 Cuban military
personnel are currently stationed in Third World
countries. Most of these personnel serve in combat
units in Angola, Ethiopia, and to some extent Mozam-
bique (see table 5). The rest perform mainly military
advisory and training functions.

Eastern Europe

39. East European:states have also provided support
to Third World nations and insurgent movements,
often in close cooperation with the USSR. While in

21
—SEERET—

 

Third World Countries
November 1978

 

 

  
  
   
 

 

  

 

 

 

ci Advisers Military
and Technicians Personnel
Sub-Saharan Africa .. £.065-9575__93,695-97,120
7,000 19,000-20,000
35 5-10
10 ann
200 300
25 100-200
1,000 13,000-15,000
200-400 200
* Guinea-Bissau 50-110 50-140
Mozambique 300-350 '800-1,000
Sao Tome and Principe... 100-200 50-100
Sierra Leone 4s _
Tanzania 100-200 -
= 180-170
Middle East/North Africa. __760-870 —-800-1,400__
60-70 -
315 100-150
195, -
200-300 500-1,000
y - 200-250;
Latin America 10
Guyana 10
Jamaica -
Total 310,000-10,680  $4,445~38,590
Secret
Table 6

East European Military Assistance to Third World
Countries, 1955-77

 
 
  
  
 
 

 

Arms Commitments Million US Dollars
Ceechoslovakia 1.408
Poland .. 471
Hungary 240
East Cermany .. 121
Bulgaria uy

Subtotal 2,357
Romania _ «&
Yugoslavia 1,155,

Tota 3576

 

Seerct

most cases this support has furthered Soviet policy
objectives, the East Europeans have had their. own
political and economic motives. These countries have
provided military assistance (see table 6) as well as
military experts (see table 4) to maintain the equip-
ment and train the recipients in its use.
Page-28
—SECRETA

40. East Germany has been especially active in
furnishing advisers to strengthen local security services
and to establish Soviet-type political institutions, East
Germany sees its involvement in the Third World as
also serving its own interests, such as affirming its
legitimacy as an important actor on the international
scene among both its own people and other govern-
ments, and establishing productive economic relations
with Third World states and movements. Indeed,
fostering profitable trading arrangements is a strong
motive for the involvement of many East European
states, all of which are preoccupied with their own
domestic problems, the most serious of which are
economic.

41. Romania and Yugoslavia have objectives vis-a-
vis the Third World that differ radically from those of
the USSR and that do not purposely serve Soviet
interests. The Romanians see conflicts in the Third
World primarily as stages upon which they can play
the larger international role of mediator—as opposed

to partisan. Doing so, they believe, buttresses their

independence from the USSR. Yugoslavia tries to win
the states and movements of the Third World to the
nonaligned movement, of which it is a leader, rather
than to an international Communist movement led by
the USSR.

42. The East European governments have not com-
mitted combat troops in support of national liberation
movements and progressive regimes in the Third
World. Although they generally share the Soviets’
ideological commitments, Moscow's Warsaw Pact al-

lies in Eastern Europe would be reluctant to send-

troops.

North Korea

43. The North Koreans do not wish to be identified
as Soviet surrogates. North Korean involvement
abroad has become increasingly circumscribed as
President Kim II-song has tried to avoid involvement
with countries or insurgent groups aligned on either
side of the Sino-Soviet rivalry. More recently, how-
ever, North Korea's sympathy for Kampuchea (Cam-
bodia) has clearly reflected a tilt toward China in
North Korean policy. The Soviets probably do not
wish to encourage North Korean military activities

. abroad.

Angola and Ethiopia

44. The Angolan and Ethiopian cases provide some
useful insights regarding the role of friendly forces in

22

Soviet policy and underline the political and military
advantages of their use. In particular, the deployment
of Cuban forces to Angola to support the Popular
Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA)
‘disarmed much of the critical foreign reaction against_
Soviet involvement. Cuban support for the MPLA
dates from the early 1960s. Before 1975, however, the
number of Cubans working with the MPLA never
exceeded a few hundred and for the most part
averaged around 30. Nonetheless, Cuban support for
MPLA leader Neto remained constant, even when the
Soviets backed one of his rivals from 1972 until 1974,

45, The ultimate requirement for sending more
than 15,000 Cuban troops to Angola during 1975-76
was probably unforeseen by Havana in mid-1975
when it apparently decided upon a further increase in
its aid to the MPLA. We do not know whether
Moscow pressured the Cubans, but it is clear that the
USSR and Cuba consulted closely before the decision
was made. A final decision to supply large numbers of
Cuban troops was probably not made until July 1975,
when the MPLA had run into great difficulties on the

* battlefield,

46. The Cuban forces bore the brunt of the fighting
and were indispensable in establishing the MPLA's
control of the central government. They continue to
play a key role in countering the guerrilla threat to the
Angolan regime, which is totally dependent on Cuban
military assistance to remain in power. Although some
Soviet military advisers saw action with MPLA units
during the civil war, Soviet participation in the fight-
ing was limited mainly to logistic support. The role of
the Soviets in the Cuban military operations in Angola
is not known, though we assume that the strategy and
tactics the Cubans employed were coordinated with
the Soviets.

47. In any case, Soviet military advisers appear to
have a growing responsibility for military operations
in Angola. They reportedly operate the naval base in
Luanda, and 11 Soviet generals arrived in August to
advise the Angolan armed forces. One of these officers
has been assigned to each of the country’s military
districts. In addition, Soviet and East European eco-
nomic personnel have moved into important financial
and commercial positions in the Ministries of Trans-
port, Fisheries, and Trade. These Ministries had. been
virtually run by Cubans, who filled much of the
vacuum created by the departure of the managerial
and technical personnel of the colonial era.

SECRET
Page-29
—SEEREF—

48. In Ethiopia, Moscow's role in Cuban military
operations was clearly more dominant from the outset,
The Soviets would certainly have preferred to play
both sides of the Ethiopian-Somali conflict and medi-
ate a settlement that would have assured Soviet influ-
ence in both countries as well as access to facilities
there. To assuage Somali concern over Moscow's wid-
ening support of Ethiopia, Soviet leaders may have
hoped at least initially to channel their military assist-
ance largely through Cuban military personnel.

49. In November 1977 General V. I. Petrov, First
Deputy Commander of Soviet Ground Forces, arrived
in Ethiopia with a retinue of high-ranking Soviet
officers to study Ethiopian military needs. By that
time some .250 Soviet military personnel were in
Ethiopia, 12 of whom were assigned to advisory
positions with the Ethiopian high command.

50. The airlift of Cuban forces and Soviet military
equipment and supplies went into high gear in De-
cember 1977, and by mid-January 1978 some 1,700
Cuban troops had been transported to Ethiopia. The
turning point im the conflict occurred in late January
when Cuban units joined in the defense of the city of
Harar and Cuban-piloted aircraft began bombing
Somali positions. Somali forces were driven back, and

the Ethiopian counteroffensive got under way, culmi-
nating in the withdrawal of Somali forces from the
Ogaden ‘in early March. When the airlift of Cuban
troops ended in early April, there were as many as
17,000 Cuban and some 1,200 Soviet military person-
nel in the country, as well as a number of South
Yemeni forces.

51. As the Ogaden fighting drew to a close, the
Mengistu regime turned its full attention to suppress-
ing the Eritrean secessionists in the noith. Soviet
personnel have provided logistic, advisory, and plan-
ning support to this effort, while Cuban combat
advisers have assisted Ethiopian units down to com-
pany level. No Cuban units have been sent to Eritrea.
The reinforcement and resupply of the beleaguered
Ethiopian forces at-Massawa by Soviet ships, protected
by Soviet naval combatants offshore, prevented the
loss of this vital port to the Eritrean insurgents. The
large Cuban and Soviet combat presence remaining in
the Ogaden, however, allows the Ethiopians to pursue
the campaign in Eritrea without fear of a resurgence
of major hostilities with the Somalis. Consequently,
these foreign combat troops are playing a significant
indirect role, even though not fighting in Eritrea.

52. Tables 7 and 8 provide a chronology of Soviet
and Cuban involvement in Angola and Ethiopia.

Table 7

Chronology of Soviet and Cuban Involvement in the Angolan Civil War

 

   

  

sn Moscow establishes links (littke more than propaganda support) to the
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) through the

ntj-Portuguese insurgency breaks out in Angola.
loscow, rebuffed by other Angolan insurgent groups, turns exclusively

to the smaller, weaker MPLA, providing limited support—arms,

1950s
Portuguese Communist Party.
1961
1964
money, and training.
Mid-1960s

 

1960s and early 1970s ...

 

Cuban support for MPLA beeins, with military instructors going to
Congo and training of MPLA supporters in Cuba. .
“Perhaps thousands of MPLA supporters are trained in Eastern Europe,

Cuba, and radical African states.

1972-74 .

 

faction.
Latter part of 1974

 

Soviets shift their support from Neto to Chipenda, leader of one
‘of the two other contending wings of MPLA; Cuba sticks with Neto

Soviet shipment of small arms to Neto—first concrete Soviet support of

Neto following coup in Lisbon that brought Spinola to power. 7

28 Sep 1974

 

Spinola is removed by new leftist-dominated government, which calls
for immediate decolonization of Angola. MPLA receives increased

political support from Lisbon, and tide in Lisbon-Angolaa relations
begins to turn in MPLA’s favor,

Oct-Nov 1974 ....

 

Congo.
Nov 1974
Dec 1974

 

 

MPLA receives increased quantities of Soviet arms from stockpiles in

Moscow decides to increase support of MPLA further.
Some 200 MPLA supporters go to USSR for military teaining.

SECRET
Page-30
“SEERER-
Table 7
Chronology of Soviet and Cuban Involvement in the Angolan Civil War
(Continued)
23 Mar 1975 ..First_ major hostilities occur between compcting factions in Angola.
By May 1975, Large amounts of Soviet arms for MPLA, including the first heavy +

 

weapons (tanks and large mortars), are delivered by air, mostly ta
Congo, and by sea to Pointe Noire and Luanda,
6 Jun 1975 commMPLA goes on offensive.
17 Jul 1975 The National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA) begins drive
toward Luanda.
Wy-one Saviet mil
LA takes Casito, ja

 
  
 
 
    

 

Jul 1975
23 Jul 1975

 

 

MPLA's so
Late Jul 1975 About 50 Cubans “an
equipment.
8-12 Aug 1975 “MPLA drives FNLA out of Luanda.
Mid-Aug 1978 0... -ss Castro makes final decision to send Cuban troops to Angola; majority of

foreign military advisers with MPLA at frontlines reportedly are
Cubans by this time.

 

 

 

 

27 Aug 1975. South African and MPLA forces clash; first South African offensive
action.

1-3 Sep 1975 Probable dates when first Cuban troopship is loaded for Angola.

6 Sep 1975 PLA retakes Caxito,

19 Sep 1975 FNLA retakes Caxito.

24 Sep 1975. First of five Cuban troopships that travel to Congo in September and

 

October arrives at Pointe Noire. .
80 Sep 1975 Cuban airlift of arms and men to Angola begins: at least five transports

(four or five Bristol Britannias and at least one, maybe two, IL-18s)

fly across Atlantic in September and October; no urgency is appar-

ent, as the Cuban troop movement depends on sealift.

 

 

| Atlantic,
Ocean A ng ol a net
A
Page-31
Table 7
Chronology of Soviet and Cuban Involvement in the Angolan Civil War
(Continued)
Mid-Oct 1975 At least 2,000 Cuban saldiers are now in Angola, ENLA is within a few 7

 

 

7

foe

   
 

LA and the Nations! Cui

 

   

miles of Lacerda.
Liberation of Angola (UNITA) la coordinated aff iver.

21 Oct 1975, Some 2,000 South African troops with armor enter Angola te join
anti-MPLA forces,

23 Oct 1975 South African armored battalion captuces Lubange, Moscow media.

report South Alrican invasion and advance on Lubango,

 
          

By bate Oct 1973 MPLA forces ande wboth wrth andl south Aeotse
2% Oct 1975 UNITA-FNLA forces capture port of Mocamedes.
29 Oct-Mar 1975 Soviet VTA airlift of military equipment to Angola for MPLA. Three

Soviet naval ships (first evident Soviet naval involvement) deliver
aviation fuel to Conakry, Guinea, for use by transiting Soviet military
air (ransports.

Early Nov 1975 2... snus Conflict shifts from guerrilla to conventional warfare.

4 Nov 1975 ...... --South African troops, surmounting Cuban resistance, take Lobito.
Cuban airlift accelerated.

‘Autonomous Cuban combat operations begin. At this point some 1,200
Soviet military personnel reportedly are in the country, How many
actually took part in combat is not known, but some did. In at least
‘one engagement Soviet officers commanded multiple rocket launch-
ers in an attack on UNITA forces,

28 Nov 1975 .... FNLA loses major battle near Luanda and retreats to Caxito.

24 Nov 1975 FNLA abandons Cazito and retreats northward.

25 Nov 1975 MPLA-Cuban forces stop South African-UNITA drive and inflict heavy

casualties.

By Dec 1975 .... Tide of battle has shifted in favor of MPLA.

Late Dee 1975-early Jan 1976 ..... Soviets upgrade their West African naval patrol with a guided-missile
cruiser and destroyer, a cruise-missile submarine, a tank-landing ship,
and several ausiliaries. Soviet TU-95 Bear-D naval reconnaissance
aireraft flying from Conakry and Havana undertake increased
surveillance of the southern Atlantic.

~Mascow provides Soviet-piloted {L.-62 long-range civil transports for
ferrying Cuban troops on nonstop flights from Cuba to Angola;
Cuban and Soviet troopships continue to ferry Cuban troops from
Cuba to Angola.

eves South Africa withdraws mast of its forces from Angola; FNLA is
defeated in north; UNITA forces in south and central Angola
return to guerrilla warfare, ending the period of conventional war.

Cuban military personnel in Angola estimated at 15,000-18,000.

Cuban military peronnel in Angola estimated at 19,000-20,000.

 

Nov 1975 ......

 

 

 

Jan 1976

 

By late Jan 1976 ............

  

 

Feb 1976
Nov 1978 .....

 

 

Table 8

Chronology of Soviet and Cuban Involvement in the
Ethiopian-Somali Conflict

 

First Soviet arms agreement with Ethiopia.

Soviet arms agreements broaden subsequent to series of military talks
among Ethiopian, Cuban, and Soviet representatives

Mengistu visits Moscow, signs agreement for military assistance.

Cuban ship delivers arms to Ethiopia; initial contingent of Cuban
military advisers arrives, some probably {rom South Yemen.

Somalia captures important Ethiopian strongholds in Ogaden.

Dec 1976 ...
Feb 1977

  

6 May 1977
May 1977

  

Mid-Aug 1977 ..

 

25
—SECRE—
Page-32
Mid-Sep 1977

Late Sep 1977

Mid-Oct 1977 ..

Mid-Nov 1977

Late Nov 1977 ...

- 913 Dee 1977
10 Dec 1977

15 Dec 1977

Late Dec 1977 ..

4 Jan 1978 ..
10 Jan 1978

17 Jan 1978 ....

 

 

 

 

—SEERER

Table 8

Chronology of Soviet and Cuban Involvement in the
Ethiopian-Somali Conflict
(Continued)

Seventy Soviet military advisers are in Ethiopia; Jiiiga falls; Ethiopia
placed on full war footing

Ethiopians abandon Filtu in southernmost Ogaden. Soviets begin deliv-
eries of MIG-21s.

Cuban artillerymen provide combat support to Ethiopian units in
Ogaden.

Somalia abrogates Soviet friendship treaty; Soviet military personnel are
expelled. Some 250 Soviet military personnel are in Ethiopia: 12 are
assigned to advisory positions with the Ethiopian high command;
others are to be assigned to division level soon.

+The decision to commit Cuban combat units to battle in the Ogaden
is made. Soviet VTA sirlift of military supplies and Soviet and Cuban
military personne! begins. About 1,000 Cuban troops are flown from
‘Cuba to Moscow, and then transported by Soviet aircraft to Angola.

Some 30 Cuban MIG-17 and MIG-21 pilots arrive in Ethfopis.

Soviet arms-carrying merchant ships arrive.

‘Since the end of November, about 400 more Cubans and 250 inore
Soviet military advisers arrive on airlift. There are now more than
1,000 Cubans and 500 Soviets in Ethiopia.

First Cuban combat units arrive in the Harar area of the Ozaden.

Some 1,650 Cubans are in Ethiopia.

A 2,000-man Cuban mechanized brigade and a ean atillecy bei
jon are to be deployed to the Ogaden.

The major sirlift of Cuban troops from Angola becine These troops are
flown on Cuban and Soviet transports from Cuba to Angola, where
they stay overnight before continuing on to Ethiopia on Ethiopian
and Angolan transports. With this airlift from Angola, that of Cuban.
troops via Moscow that began in November comes to an end.

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Saudi Arabla
Page-33
—SECREF—

Table 8

Chronology of Soviet and Cuban Involvement in the
Ethiopian-Somali Conflict
(Continued)

oe Somalis begin last effort to take Harar—briefly penetrate city as they

did ia November 1977.
Cuban units join in defense of the city; first Cuban prisoners taken south,

of Harar; Cuban-piloted aircraft bombing Somali positions.

_.Soviets send large number of naval ships to the Red Sea presumably to
keep port of Massawa open and supplied.

27 Jan-1 Feb 1978. Somali forces are driven back from Harar; Somali brigade destroyed

{ city; more than 3,000 Cuban combat troops now in Ethiopia

 

24 Jan 1978

 
 

Late Jam 1978 occ

 

south

   

. Ethiopians begin counteroffensive northeast from Dire Dawa.
S Feb 1978 cece Somali forces northeast of Dire Dawa fall back under Ethiopian
pressure.
11 Feb 1978 .. Somalia declares “state of emergency” and full mobilization. Somali

 

forces regroup north of Harar; Ethiopians continue to advance uo the
railroad to Djibouti,

Ethiopian and Cuban troops moving Into position for three-pronged
attack to recapture Jiiiga; Arabi and Giri Kocher captured, thus
outflanking Somali positions at Marda Pass.

Cuban forces advancing north of Jijiga are reinforced with 150 to 250

19 Feb 1978 ..

 

  

 

  

 

 

24 Feb 1978
tanks.

25-26 Feb 1978 .... ...Ethiopians complete plans for final attack on Jijiga during weekend of 4
March; poor weather hampers air operations.

28 Feb 1978 .. ...Ethiopian/Cuban forces continue to push through the mountains
northeast of Jiiiga.

1 Mar 1978 .... At least four Cuban generals are now in Ethiopia. Cuban/Ethiopian
forces break out of mountains northwest of Jiiiea,

2-3 Mar 1978 Bad weather delays further movement.

4 Mar 1978 Weather clears; final assault on Jijiga begins, supported by heavy

 

airstrikes.
taken; Cubans/Ethiopians push through town to southeast.
Cuban/Ethiopian forces continue to push south; Somalis withdraw

under pressure.
Somalis announce withdrawal of all forces from Ogaden.

  

5 Mar 1978
8 Mar 1978

 

 

9 Mar 1978 ...
11 Mar 1978 Somali withdrawal from Ogaden is in progress.
2 Apr 1978 Airlift of Cuban troops to Ethiopia ends. By that time, total of 16,000 to

 

17,000 Cuban, including at least 1,000 medical personnel and
military advisers, are in Ethiopia. The airlift from Cuba via Angola
brought about 11,500 Cuban military personnel.

Some 19,000 to 15,000 Cuban military personnel are in Ethiopia, of
which about 8,600 are combat troops deployed throughout the
eastern and southern Ogaden.

Nov 1978
Page-34
i

A. Soviet Forces Deployed in Distant Areas

53. Naval surface ships and submarines are the
principal Soviet military forces deployed in distant
areas and are supplemented by periodic deployments
of naval aircraft. The overall level of Soviet naval
Operations in distant areas has remained relatively
stable since 1970, following the steady expansion in
the 1960s of Soviet naval presence abroad (see figure
3). That expansion paralleled the extension of Soviet
military assistance into the Third World but was
motivated initially by Soviet concerns over potential
strategic threats from carrier-launched airstrikes and
submarine-launched ballistic missiles. Although these
Concerns remain prominent in Soviet distant oper-
Operations of Soviet Figure 3.
General Purpose Naval Forces
Outside Home Waters, 1965-78*

48 Thousand ship-days

 
 

40

 
 
 

35

 
 
 
 

30

  
   

Caribbean Sea

 
  
 

25

  

West African
Waters

    

   

° 1965 68 70 72 74 #76 78

Mine-clearing activity in the Gulf of Suez
(A Harbor-clearing activity in Bangladesh

“Excludes activities of ballistic miatile submarines
4nd oceanographic end apace aupport ships.

—Seeret—
ae

 

28
—SEEREF—

- SOVIET MILITARY FORCES AND CAPABILITIES FOR DISTANT OPERATIONS

ations, the Navy continues to perform important
missions related to the projection of power and influ-
ence in the Third. World, primarily by maintaining
forces in regions of Soviet interest (see figure 4) which
can be augmented relatively quickly in times of crisis,

54. In addition to routine and show-the-{lag mis:
sions, Soviet naval forces have demonstrated support
for friendly nations and possibly inhibited use of
hostile naval forces against Soviet allies. During Third
World crises the Soviets have augmented their naval
Presence in the areas of conflict; the Arab-Israeli war
in 1967, the Jordanian crisis in 1970, the Indo-Paki-
stani war in 1971, the Arab-Israeli war in 1978, the
Angolan civil war in 1975, and the Ethiopian-Somali
conflict in January 1978, (See Annex A for details.)

Mediterranean

55. The Mediterranean Squadron, the largest of the
permanently deployed Soviet naval forces, made -its
appearance in 1964. Before the loss of access to
Egyptian port facilities in 1976, the number of ships in
the squadron averaged 54 units. Since then the num-
ber has declined to 45 units—normally 12 surface
combatants (eight major combatants, two mine-
sweepers, and two amphibious ships), nine submarines,
and 24 auxiliaries. The squadron relies mainly on the
Black Sea Fleet for surface ships and the Northern
Fleet for submarines.

56. The basing of Soviet naval aircraft in Egypt
from 1968 to 1972 significantly increased Soviet mili-
tary capabilities in the area to perform reconnaissance
and antisubmarine warfare (ASW) missions. In addi-
tion, tactical strike aircraft probably were to be based
there. Since 1972, however, when the Soviets were
denied use of Egyptian military airfields, the Mediter-
ranean Squadron has had no land-based air support.

57. The Soviets have not been able to gain in any
other Mediterranean nation the degree of freedom or
full range of support for their Mediterranean Squad--
ron that they enjoyed in Egypt. The loss of. the
Eeyptian facilities has probably contributed to the
drawdown of surface combatants. Also, the number
and length of diesel submarine deployments from the
Northern Fleet have been reduced. Units of the
Page-35
!

se

ore 8) amg Aa

  

 

 

    
    

aces aovevevernt |
Aes edema me etey ED wana monn Rat
swectaumamons

 

 

 

             

 

81644809104 Amit d yA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1029 290d

 

 

 

  

| geree  - oe
ns0 15 joules Aaa fo Starring) 610%)

COA eee ta as
Page-36
— SECRET

squadron continue to make extensive use of anchor-
ages in international waters, but most. surface units
return to their home ports for major repairs. Facilities
in Algeria, Syria, and Yugoslavia are used for subma-
rine repairs and maintenance.

58. Albania. Since the period 1958-61, when the
Soviets operated a submarine base at Saseno, they have
not had access to naval or air facilities in Albania, nor
have Soviet ships made port calls. The current Alba-
nian leadership would almost certainly not allow the
Soviets access to Albanian facilities, but this leadership
is without allies since its break with the Chinese earlier
this year. Consequently, a new leadership that’ would
look upon an alliance with the USSR with some favor
might come to power in Albania during the period of
this Estirnate.

59. Yugoslavia. The Soviets routinely have a diesel
submarine, accompanied by a tender, in overhaul in
Tivat, the only Yugoslav shipyard officially designated
for the repair of foreign naval ships. In violation of the
1974 Yugoslav maritime law, but with Yugoslav acqui-
escence, Soviet naval auxiliaries, posing as civilian
ships, also have beet: repaired at two or three similar
yards not officially assigned for this purpose.

60. Despite the arrival of a large floating drydock in
1975, the facilities at Tivat are more limited than
those which had been available at Alexandria in
Egypt, and the Soviets have been attempting to per-
suade Yugoslavia to grant them increased access.

61. Tunisia. Since June 1977, when Soviet ships
began using the Menzel Bourguiba (Manzil Bu Raqay-
bah) shipyard at Bizerte, Tunisia, a number of surface
combatants, diesel submarines, and auxiliaries have
undergone repairs there. Although there was an unex-
plained hiatus in repair activities between December
1977 and April 1978, regular Soviet usage has re-
sumed. Several Soviet surface ships have been repaired
at Bizerte since April 1978, but no submarines appear
to have used the yard since early 1979, At present this
shipyard provides the only drydock available on short
notice to the Soviets in the Mediterranean.

62. Algeria. Since early 1976 diesel submarines
have been anchoring regularly in the harbor of An-
naba, Algeria, for minor maintenance and repair from
a submarine tender that usually accompanies them,
The Soviets will continue their efforts to obtain the use
of the port of Mers el Kebir, which has excellent
berthing and storage facilities but no major repair
capability.

31
—SECRET—

63. Italy. The Soviets have made approaches to the
Italian Government regarding the use of ports such as
Taranto to provide repair support for the Mediterra-
nean Squadron. They most recently have shown inter-
est in the use of Naples. There are indications-that the
Italian Government would not approve such access at
any of its ports.

64. Syria. The Soviets currently have access to the
Syrian port of Tartus and usually keep several ships
there, including .a repair ship. Some minor mainte-
nance is performed on submarines, but the port has no
capability for major repairs. The Syrians have made
no formal commitment to grant base rights to the
Soviet fleet, and there is no clear sign that the Soviets
have access to any repair or storage facilities ashore.

65. Libya. The Soviets do not have access to Libyan
ports, which in any case lack significant repair facilj-
ties. Libya may offer some potential for Soviet access
in the future, however.

Indian Ocean

66. The Soviet Navy has maintained a near-continu-
ous presence in the Indian Ocean since 1968. This
force normally consists of seven-surface combatants
(four major combatants, two minesweepers, one am-
phibious ship), one submarine, and 10 auxiliaries
drawn mainly from the Pacific Ocean Fleet. Soviet
naval ships continue to make extensive use of anchor-
ages in international waters and to obtain logistic ~
support from Iraq, South Yemen, and Ethiopia.

67. The ouster of Soviet military personnel from
Somalia in 1977 deprived the Indian Ocean Squadron
of its support facilities ashore—the port and airfield at
Berbera developed by the Somalis with extensive
Soviet help. These facilities included POL storage, a
naval communications relay station, a barracks com-
plex, a floating drydock, and a naval cruise missile
handling and storage facility. By the time the Soviets
were expelled, they had used only some of these
facilities, but all of them were important for their
potential to sustain higher levels of naval and air
activity of the squadron. Soviet naval reconnaissance
and ASW aircraft (TU-95 Bear D's and IL-88 Mays)
had used other Somali airfields periodically to patrol
the Arabian Sea and on several occasions to reconnoi-
ter US ships (see figure 5). The Soviets will remain
alert to opportunities to restore their position in Soma-
lia, but they clearly are proceeding on the assumption
that they will not regain use of the Somali facilities in
the near future. .
Page-37
—SEERET—

68. Moscow wasted no time in acquiring access to
facilities in other countries, including Ethiopia.
Among the Ethiopian ports of potential use is
Massawa, which has a small naval base with limited
repair facilities that will require rehabilitation. The
port of Assab is smaller than Massawa and more
crowded, but has a fuel storage facility. The floating
drydock formerly at Berbera and then temporarily at
Aden is now located off Ethiopia. Despite the geo-
graphic problems and the potential for disruption of
their operations from the continued fighting in Eri-
trea, the Soviets seem determined to make the best of
the situation.

69. The agreement also grants the Soviets-access to
temporary facilities at Dahlak Island, which they will
share with the Ethiopian Navy pending the restoration
of facilities at Massawa, and to a separate facility, to
be constructed and controlled by the Soviets, on the
Red Sea coast north of Assab opposite Sanahbor Island.
The floating drydock formerly at Berbera—and then
temporarily at Aden—is now located at Dahlak.

70. The Soviets have long supported South, Yemen's
Marxist regime but, despite diplomatic pressuring and
increased arms deliveries, have been unable to obtain
complete freedom of use of South Yemeni facilities.
-Nevertheless, since 1968, Soviet naval ships have regu-
larly called at Aden for replenishment, crew rest,
water, and minor maintenance. Soviet transport air-
craft regularly use the airport at Aden in support of
Soviet military missions in the area:

71. Greater Soviet access to, and control of, naval
support facilities may result from events there in June
1978 that brought a more pro-Soviet leadership to
power. The former British naval base at Aden and
nearby Khormaksar airfield offer a more attractive
location and support capability than the facilities in
Ethiopia. The Soviets recently ‘increased their use of
Aden and constructed a communications station
nearby, evidently a replacement for the one they
gave up in Berbera.

72. The Soviets also have given extensive technical
assistance to South Yemen in constructing a new
airfield that is nearing completion at Al Anad. This
field, begun in the spring of 1976, long before the

explusion from Somalia, will be able to handle ad-*

vanced military aircraft. The Soviets probably will
make use of this airfield for both civilian and military
aircraft, including naval reconnaissance.

73. Since 1968 the Soviet Indian Ocean Squadron
has used the Iraqi ports of Al Basrah and Umm Qasr

32
—SEERET—

for logistic support. For a time during 1974 and 1975,
a Soviet repair ship was stationed at Al Basrah,
primarily to aid in repairing Iraqi naval units. Soviet
naval ships also made occasional use of the ship's
repair facilities, but no formal agreement providing -
Soviet access to Iraqi ports is known to exist. The
frequency of Soviet calls there has recently declined
from an annual average of 15 between 1973 and 1976
to only four during 1978. This reduction may be due
to the recent cooling of Soviet-Iraqi relations, stepped-
up Soviet naval activity in the Red Sea area, and the
suspension of the Soviet patrol of the Strait of Hormuz.

74, Soviet approaches to other Indian Ocean nations
for access to port facilities have been reported, but
nationalism and sentiment for a “zone of peace” in the
Indian Ocean will likely frustrate such initiatives. The
Soviets are aware of the desire of some littoral states to
curtail great-power presence in the Indian Ocean.
Although Brezhnev has given sympathetic public
treatment to the idea of a “zone of peace,” there is no
indication that the Soviets will unilaterally reduce
their naval presence in the Indian Ocean or yield on
the principle of freedom of navigation there.

South Atlantic

75. Since late 1970, the Soviets have maintained a
small naval presence off West Africa. The initial
Durpose was to support the government of Guinea
against a threatened coup from Portuguese Guinea—
now Cuinea-Bissau—but in late 1975 this presence ~~
was expanded somewhat to support the Cuban inter-
vention in Angola. Since then the force has normally
comprised one or two major surface combatants, one
submarine, one amphibious ship, and several auxil-
iaries. Over the past year at least one combatant has
been stationed near Luanda, and a repair ship has
been there since 1976, serving Soviet units as well as
Angolan patrol craft. In addition, a number of Soviet
naval auxiliaries regularly deploy into the Atlantic for
intelligence collection and research operations.

76. Soviet surface combatants on patrol off Guinea
and accasionally some units en route to the Indian
Ocean reprovision at Conakry. Soviet use of naval
support facilities ashore there remains limited.

TT. Deployments of Bear D naval reconnaissance
aircraft have been a major part of Soviet activity in
West Africa. Since 1977, when President Toure with-
drew permission for the Bears to use Guinean airfields,
these deployments have shifted to Luanda. Because
Angola is some 2,000 miles southeast of Guinea,
Page-38
Soviet Naval Air Reconnaissance Deployments to Distant Areas

 

 

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  

 

 

Indian Ocean

  

South Atiantic Ocean

 

i
/

Present deployment trom Soviet bases
Seployment rom Soviet bases

 

 

nt TUBS nonstop unretusled mission

fadlue with fourhour tolter

—— Past TU-95 nonstop unretueled mission
fadius with tourtour foiter

 

—— Present 1-38 nonstop unretueled mission

fadlus with fourhour toiter

——— Patt 11-38 nonstop unretueted mission
radius with fourhour tolter

 

 

 

 

[West page vs bark!

: * J
mas
Page-39
SEGRE

Luanda is much less satisfactory as a base for air
reconnaissance of the North Atlantic, particularly the
approaches to the Mediterranean (see figure 5). More-
over, the distance to Luanda from the TU-95 staging
bases in the Kola Peninsula is nearly the maximum
range of the aircraft. Therefore, apparently in the
interest of safety, all Bear D flights to and from
Luanda since 1977 have been staged through Cuba,
doubling transit distances. The transport aircraft that
support these flights continue, however, to stage
through Conakry.

78. In Angola the Soviets have access to shore
installations, but facilities for major work are lacking.

79. The Soviets are probably seeking access to
additional facilities in West Africa to improve their
basing and reconnaissance flexibility. Since February
Soviet naval units have paid visits to Benin and Soviet
military assistance to that country has sharply in-
creased, but the USSR is not known to have access to
any facilities ashore.

Caribbean

80. [This paragraph of the earlier version of NIE
11-10-79 addressed Soviet military activities in
Cuba. In view of events related to this matter
since issuance of the Estimate, the paragraph
has been deleted. The reader ts directed to
more recent intelligence publications for infor-
mation and judgments on this subject.]

Pacific Ocean

81. Except for Indian Ocean deployments and
annual ASW activities in the Philippine Sea, Soviet
surface combatants do not normally operate in the
open ocean areas of the Pacific. The Pacific Ocean
Fleet conducts the great majority of its training and
routine operations in the Sea of Japan, along the Kuril
Islands, and off the Kamchatka Peninsula. Intelligence
collection patrols are periodically conducted in the
Tsushima, Tsugaru, and La Perouse Straits to provide
the fleet command with surveillance of these major
passages.

B. Soviet Forces Available for Deployment to
Distant Areas cp

82. The Soviet Union has vast ground, air,jand naval
forces on which it can draw for deployment to distant
areas. The deployment of a large segment of these
forces to distant areas, however, is constrained not only

35
SECRET

by the practical difficulties of moving large forces over
long distances but also by the requirement, as Moscow
sees it, to retain the bulk of these forces in the USSR
and Eastern Europe in readiness for their primary
mission—waging war with NATO or China. On the
other hand, these factors would not restrict the deploy-
ment of smaller units.

Noval Forces

83. The number of ships and submarines normally
deployed outside home waters is only a small fraction
of the Soviet inventory. Additional naval forces for
deployment to distant areas can be drawn from. the
approximately 270 principal surface combatants (in-

* cluding two aircraft carriers), 260 general purpose

submarines, and 100 amphibious warfare ships of the
four major Soviet fleets (Northern, Baltic, Black Sea,
and Pacific). About 70 percent of the surface combat-
ants and amphibious ships and a somewhat lower
percentage of the submarines could probably be ready
for combat operations in four days.

84. The following tabulation shows the number of*
days it would take Soviet naval units, as applicable, to
reach various distant areas at a speed of 10 knots from
the different fleets and from the Mediterranean:

 

 

Mediter- Black Baltic North- Pacific

ranean Sea Sea ern = Ocean
Eastern Mediterranean — 2 13, 19 -
West Coast of Africa 215 24 24 30 -
Northwest Arabian Sea 9* 15s* - - 25

85. The Black Sea Fleet is copstrained in its deploy-
ments by the Montreux Convention, which requires
prior notification to Turkey of planned transits and
limits the numbers and types of ships that may pass
through the Turkish Straits. To alleviate the problems
these limitations create for the Black Sea Fleet, the
Soviets use a contingency declaration. system that
allows a limited number of ships to deploy out of area
to meet an emergency without violating the conven-
tion. This system has enabled them to send up to 15
surface combatants to the Mediterranean within nine

days.

86. The Montreux Convention prohibits the passage
of submarines through the Turkish Straits unless they
are to be repaired in a shipyard outside the Black Sea.
Probably for this reason the Black Sea Fleet has only
24 operational submarines—a small percentage of the
total Soviet submarine order of battle. Although the
Convention is ambiguous on restricting aircraft carri-

* Through the Suez Canal with preferential passage.
Page-40
—_SEERER—

ers, any potential challenge to the right of passage of
the Moskva- and Kiev-class ships would be weakened
by the precedent of passage these ships have already
established.

Amphibious Forces

87. Manpower in the Soviet Naval Infantry is
estimated at 10,000 to 12,000. The basic unit is the
naval rifle regiment, totaling about 1,900 men in three
infantry battalions, a tank battalion, and supporting
units. Six regiments have been identified: one in each
of the three western fleet areas and three in the
Pacific. Only one of the Pacific Fleet regiments is
believed to be fully manned. Constituted for mobility
rather than firepower, naval infantry is primarily
intended to serve as the initial assault element in
amphibious landings.

88. Most of the Soviet Navy's amphibious ships (see
table 9) are capable of deployment to distant areas,
although only 28 ships of the Rogov, Alligator, and
Ropucha classes are well suited for carrying combat

troops on extended deployments. Forward deploy-

ments of these ships have been a routine practice since
the late 1960s and are a regular feature of Soviet naval
deployments in the Mediterranean Sea and Indian
Ocean and off West Africa. There are rarely more
than one or two amphibious ships in each area. It is not

 

known whether these ships routinely carry a detach-
ment of naval infantry; to date no more than 100
troops are believed to have ever been embarked on
any forward-deployed amphibious ship.

Noval Aviation

89. Any of the long-range aircraft at the disposal of
Naval Aviation (see table 10) could be used in distant
areas if they could stage through forward bases. In
practice only Bear D's, Badgers, Mays, and Mails have
been employed in this way for distant operations, and
only in limited numbers. No Soviet naval aircraft at
the present time are based in the Third World. Since
1972 the Soviets have periodically deployed TU-95
reconnaissance aircraft to Cuba, Cuinea, Angola, So-
malia, and Vietnam. Currently, they have access only
to'Cuba, Angola, and Vietnam. When combined with
flights from bases in the USSR, Soviet naval air
reconnaissance can patrol the western Pacific and
large portions of the North and South Atlantic.

 

Frontal Aviation

90. Relatively few of the several thousand combat
aircraft in Frontal Aviation could be brought to bear
directly in distant areas. None are currently con-
figured for aerial refueling, and most are deployed
opposite NATO in Europe or along the Sino-Soviet
border. Frontal Aviation equipment is compatible,

 

 

 

 

Table 9
Soviet Amphibious Assault Ships—Order of Battle by Fleet
Individual
Tonnage Northern Baltic Black Sea Pacific Total
Ivan Rogov 13,000 - _ - 1 !
Alligator 5,800 2 2 5 5 14
Ropucha 4,500 5 3 - s 13
Polnocay 800-1,100 7 19 20 9 55
1 - 10 u
S 25 30 94
—Seeret—

 

Table 10
Soviet Naval Aircraft

 

 

 

Number in Inventory

45 -
25
a7
sere Strike Roy
TU-16 Badger .......... Reconnaissance, ASW, strike,
electronic warfare 429
‘TU-22 Blinder Reconnaissance, strike a7
ASW 83

 

BE-12 Mail

 

 

SECRET
Page-41
—SEEREF—

however, with equipment already sold to Third World
countries, and Frontal Aviation could be drawn on, as
it has been in the past, for selected tactical air
resources.

Airborne Forces

91. Although there are limitations on Soviet capa-
to use airborne forces in distant areas (see
discussion of airborne assault operations, paragraphs
113-120), there are many types of distant operations
for which these units are well suited. Because of their

   

high level of readiness, small size (7,800 men), light
equipment, and highly mobile and well-developed
command and control, airborne divisions can be de-
ployed more rapidly than either tank or motorized
rifle divisions, and they can be more easily supported
logistically; but they have less firepower.

92. The seven regular airborne divisions (see figure
6) are believed to have most of their authorized men
and equipment and to be capable of depléying on
short notice. Although these units, like their Western
counterparts, are necessarily lighter in both firepower

 

 

  

Soviet Airborne Division Headquarters Figure 6
Jonavacteaining Division
Kaunas Vitesk
Poland «Moscow
Tata ' U.S. SR.
[ceed é
Hon. &
Romania Bolgrad
ol gra ge
China
Fergana,
Page-42
SEGRE

and armor protection than other types of divisions,
improvements have been made in their firepower,
ground mobility, and air defense capability:

— Some 120 amphibious assault vehicles are being
added to each airborne division. These can be
parachuted from Cock, Candid, and Cub

transports.

— The number of fully armored, air-transportable
85-mm assault guns in a division reportedly has
been increased from 18 to 31.

—The self-propelled M-1974 122-mm_ howitzer
may be replacing towed howitzers in each
division. -

— Anew, highly mobile 122-mm or 140-mm multi-
ple rocket launcher on a truck chassis reportedly
is replacing the towed version that has been
standard equipment. .

— Each division has been equipped with 189 shoulder-
fired SA-7 surface-to-air missiles. _

 

C. Other Soviet Resources

for Distant
Operations :

Overseas Facilities

93. It is clear from the Soviets’ efforts to acquire
access to naval and air facilities abroad and from their
use of those facilities that access is a prized objective of
Moscow's policy in-the Third World. It has played a
key role in the projection of Soviet power and influ-
ence in the Third World, and is important for its
potential to sustain higher levels of naval and air
activity.

94. Access, however, is not to be confused with
formal base rights, which the Soviets have never held
in any Third World nation. Perhaps the closest they
have come to exercising formal base rights was their
near-sovereigti control of naval facilities in the port of
Alexandria before their ouster from Egypt in 1976.

95. The Soviets have been reluctant to become
overly dependent in distant areas on shore support
which might suddenly be denied them in time of crisis
or major war. For this reason, naval auxiliaries for
fuel, water, supplies, and repairs usually are deployed:
with Soviet combatants even in areas where shore
support is available. Figure 4 shows the foreign naval
and air facilities to which Soviet military forces have
access.

96. In support of current operations, Soviet reliance
on overseas facilities is heaviest in the case of air

38

operations, enabling long-range aircraft to conduct
military airlifts and reconnaissance over large parts of
the world which could not otherwise be reached from
Soviet territory. Access to foreign ports greatly facili.
tates diesel submarine operations in the Mediterra-
nean, but these operations are not absolutely depend-
ent on that access. The same level of deployment
could probably be maintained through the use of
international anchorages and more frequent. deploy-
ments of shorter duration. Surface combatants are
least reliant on overseas facilities.

Merchant Marine

97. As the principal means for transporting Soviet
arms and military equipment destined for friendly
forces and insurgent movements, the merchant marine
is vital to Moscow's efforts to influence developments
in the Third World. As table 11 shows, more than 98
percent of the ships in the USSR's oceangoing cargo
fleet (vessels designed for the movement of nonbulk
cargo) fall into categories of general purpose freighters
and roll-on/roll-off (ro/ro) ships.

98. Most of the USSR’s general purpose fleet consists
of ships with at least two decks that carry their own
cargo-handling gear (cranes or booms). More than 500
of these ships have booms with capacities of 40 tons or
more, capable of handling heavy vehicles such as
tanks. In addition, at least 230 vessels in the fleet have
large hatches with lengths of 50 feet or more, facilitat-
ing the transport and concealment of bulky military
objects such as aircraft and missiles.

99. The Soviets have been able to use their general
cargo and'ro/ro vessels to mount crash military sealifts
in the past. At such times, merchant ships may cease or
limit commercial service and act as naval auxiliaries.
Many Soviet merchant ships would require little or no
modification to serve in a naval role and provide
direct logistic support to military forces.

100. During 1977 a total of 360 individual Soviet
merchant ships delivered arms to 30 Third World

Table 11
Soviet Oceangoing Cargo Fleet

 

  
  

Number Deadweight
of Ships Tonnage
(millions)
Total cargo fleet 839 69
Ceneral purpose. 795 6.6
Roll-on/roll-off 29 0.2
1s OL

Cellular containe

 

SEGRE
Page-43
SEGRE

countries. Sixty of these deliveries were made by ro/ro
ships. These ships, which the USSR is currently stress-
ing in modernizing its cargo fleet, were introduced in
1974 and reflect the latest technology for fast loading
and offloading of wheeled and tracked vehicles. It can
be expected that in areas where port congestion is a
problem and the need for military equipment is
immediate, the Soviets will make greater use of ro/ro

ships. For example, in Ethiopia, general cargo ships.

waited as long as 70 days to berth, and some Soviet
arms carriers waited 20 days. Ro/ro ships had a
turnaround time of two to seven days, demonstrating
their utility in a crisis situation, especially where a
secure beachhead is available.

Fishing Fleets

101. The USSR's worldwide fishing fleets play no
direct role in Soviet distant military operations. Yet, by
their sheer numbers—more than 4,100 modern ves-
sels—they have potential for supporting certain types
of military activities. They already provide meteoro-
logical and oceanographic data used by the Soviet
Navy and could serve as transports for small, lightly
armed’ troop units. Properly equipped, these ships
could be adapted for mine and electromagnetic war-
fare and for use as communications stations. Soviet
fishing ships routinely report on contacts with foreign
naval units and would perform such reconnaissance
functions in a crisis to assist Soviet naval intelligence.
Soviet fishing support vessels have on occasion replen-
ished Soviet intelligence ships operating off of the US
coasts.

0. Capabilities for Distant Operations

Military Airlifts

102. The USSR’s Military Transport Aviation (VTA)
has undertaken seven major airlifts to Third World
countries.‘ They clearly have’ demonstrated deter-
mination to assist the friends of the Soviet Union even
at great distances. Although the tonnage delivered by
air is dwarfed by what the Soviets have transported by
sea, airlifts have provided critically needed equip-
ment, ammunition, and medical supplies much more
rapidly than is possible by sealift. They also have
helped overcome logistic bottlenecks in some of the

‘These Include five military sirlifts—to the Middle East (June
1967), North Yemen (November 1967), the Middle East (October
1973), Angola (October 1975), and Ethiopia (November 1977), and
two airlifts for disaster relief to Peru (July 1970, earthquake) and
Pakistan (December 1970, flood).

39
—SEERET—

smaller Third World ports and have resupplied iso-
lated friendly forces. In addition, these operations
represent to both the recipients and the rest of the
world a dramatic demonstration of Soviet commit-
ment. While it is impossible to measure the psycho-
logical impact of such missions on the client, the sight
alone of aircraft offloading urgently needed supplies
can boost morale and possibly play a role in the
outcome of a crisis. 7

103. These operations, with the exception of the two
to Peru and Pakistan, demonstrate that VTA can
mount a major, unopposed airlift in a short time and
sustain it, But they also have revealed limitations. The
proficiency displayed has been uneven, and in some
cases even relatively low levels of effort have taxed
VTA’s capabilities.

— Obtaining clearance for overflight, landing, and,
refueling from various countries en route has
been and will continue to be crucial to the
success of VTA airlifts to the Third World. In
the past, VTA's operations have been compli-
cated by the denial of these clearances in airlifts
to the Middle East and Africa. As the distance to
be covéred by an airlift increases, clearances
become even more important. To facilitate the
acquisition of overflight clearances, VTA air-
craft involved in overseas airlifts routinely carry
the markings of Aeroflot, the USSR’s civil
airline.

Also, as the distance between refueling points
exceeds about 2,000 nautical-miles, the payload
capability of the VTA transport force—80 per-
cent of which is made up of AN-12s, which have
a fairly short range—declines rapidly, because
of the technical characteristics of this aircraft.

These factors could pose serious problems for the VTA
in intensive airlifts’ of long duration requiring heavy
payloads over distances greater than 2,000 nm. The
VTA inventory of 665 transport aircraft consists of 554
AN-12 Cubs, 49 AN-22 Cocks, and 62 IL-76 Candids.

104. Aeroflot. The Aeroflot civil fleet constitutes a
substantial reserve which enhances the capability of
VTA to airlift personnel to areas of the Third World
(see table 12). Aeroflot currently has some 1,300
medium- and long-range transports—including about
160 AN-12s—with a total lift capability of 135,000

"Annex C presents some hypothetical deployments of Soviet
general purpose forces to the Thied World that illustrate VTA airlift

capabilities.
Page-44
—SEEREF—

passengers. Many of Aeroflot's crews and much of its
equipment are available to support VTA and in fact
are used whenever needed. This capability is demon-
strated each spring and fall when Aeroflot makes over
1,000 flights transporting more than 100,000 Soviet
troops to and from bases in East Germany, Poland,
Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.

105. At the present time, most VTA airlifts out of
country utilize only a small percentage of the Aeroflot
fleet. Nonetheless, Aeroflot IL-62s played a major role
in both the Angolan and Ethiopian airlifts.

Blockade

106. A blockade is generally considered a belligerent
act carried out by military forces and aimed at
preventing the flow of maritime commerce or re-
“supply to a particular area. Blockading can be carried
out by ships, submarines, or aircraft and can involve
the use of naval mines and other means of destruction.
Although the Soviet Navy has never conducted a
blockade in a distant area, there are potential, limited
local conflicts in the Third World—such as between
North and South Yemen or Ethiopia and Somalia—
where the risk of Western involvement is minimal and
where Soviet leaders might consider a blockade by
their Navy to prevent the seaborne resupply of forces
opposing a government or faction favored by the
USSR. A blockade might appear to be a viable option

Table 12

Estimated Inventory of High-Performance Aircraft
in Aeroflot, 1977*

Jet 1,369
‘TU-104 Camel (A&B) 136
TU-124 Cookpot 66
TU-134 Crusty (Standard & A) 232
TU-154 Careless 128
1L-62/M Classic “89
YAK-40 Codling no
IL-76 Candid 8

Turboprop 1,567
AN-10 Cat 14
AN-I2 Cub 163
AN-24, Coke 820
1L-18 Coot 343
TU-114 Cleat 24
AN-26 Curl 143

Total 2,936

 

“In addition to the high-performance aircraft in Aeroflot’s
“current Inventory, the fleet includes 850 to 950 multiengine piston
alrcraft, For the most part, propeller-driven aircraft are used in
training operations and for peak traffic periods during summer
schedules.

—Seeret-

40
—SEERET—

where Soviet assistance had been requested by a
legitimate government in the region and where local
reaction could be expected to be favorable or at least
neutral.

107. Once the Soviets had announced their intent to-*
blockade, the mere presence of their combatants in
coastal waters might be sufficient to enforce the
closure. Still, because the threat of force is at least
implicit in the declaration of a blockade, the Soviets
would have to be prepared to deal with any attempt to
breach their cordon. The units which the Soviets
routinely maintain in areas such as the Indian Ocean
and off West Africa probably would be adequate to
demonstrate resolve in a blockade situation against a
poorly armed Third World nation. But to be effective
in the face of significant opposition, Soviet forces
would require augmentation. So long as augmentation
were not opposed by a major power, the Soviets
probably would be able to provide sufficient forces
from their home fleets to maintain the blockade. In
considering the feasibility of enforcing a blockade,
however, they would need to calculate the potential
vulnerability of their forces to local air and naval
attack, in addition to weighing the risk of escalation
and involvement of other major powers.

 

 

Intervention of Combat Forces in a Local Conflict

108. The Soviets have significant forces capable of
intervention in distant areas and have introduced
forces into combat situations in distant areas in the ~
past, and we believe that Soviet leaders in the future
would be willing under certain circumstances to use
forces for this purpose. Elements of all Soviet conven-
tional forces—ground, air, and naval—are potential
resources for use in situations that call for intervention.
Although Soviet airborne and amphibious forces have
generally been touted by Western observers as the
most likely components of any Soviet intervention in
the Third World, in practice these forces have not
played a role, though Soviet airborne divisions have
been placed on alert during several periods of interna-
tional tension. In the few cases where Soviet forces
have intervened, they have been composed of stand-
ard combat and support units taken from regular
formations.

109, The effectiveness of any intervention of Soviet
combat units in a local conflict would depend on
scenario-related factors, of which two are probably the
most important—the level of opposition and the loca-
tion. Naturally, the kind of opposition the Soviets
would expect to encounter would determine the feasi-
Page-45
bility of the operation and the composition of the
intervention force. Airborne troops or naval infantry
would probably make up most of the force against
light opposition. As both of these service components
are inherently mobile and lightly equipped, their
transport to the area of conflict could be accomplished
fairly quickly by air or sea.

110. Interventions against more substantial opposi-
tion, however, would probably require conventional
ground forces. If they could not be moved overland
into areas contiguous to the USSR, they would have to
depend in large part on movement by sea. The sealift
to the Middle East of a substantial intervention force—
a combat-ready motorized rifle division from the
Odessa Military District, for example—would take
around two weeks. This includes assembly, movement
to Black Sea ports, loading, transiting across the Medi-
terranean, and offloading in a Middle East port.
Deployment of larger forces—for instance, the equiv-
alent of two combined-arms armies totaling at least
120,000 men—would require two to three months.

111. A consideration in such a movement would
likely be the use of naval forces to protect the troop
ships against air and naval attack both in the interven-
tion area and en route from the Soviet Union. Naval
forces might also be needed to provide direct support
to the forces ashore, particularly naval gunfire, air-
strikes, and air reconnaissance.

112. Air and naval support of any military operation
at great distance from the USSR would be vulnerable
to interdiction. The operation of transport aircraft
would be open to attack by air defense forces, espe-
cially near their destination. Moreover, many Third
World countries possess naval forces—such as subma-
rines, aircraft, and fast patrol boats—that could pose
an appreciable threat to seaborne intervention.

Airborne Assault Operations

113, In many areas of the Third World, a Soviet
airborne division would be more than a match for any
indigenous military forces. Indeed, there are more
men with better equipment in a single Soviet airborne
division than in the armies of most African nations.
Thus, there are potentially numerous situations in
which an airborne division, from a military stand-
point, could be highly effective, although its use might
not be politically feasible.

114. The situations in which airborne forces might
be used range from antiguerrilla operations like those
conducted by the French and Belgians in Zaire last

41
SECRET

year to more conventional operations. The suitability
of an airborne force in each instance would vary. The
Soviets might be tempted to deploy an airborne unit if
they believed the likelihood of combat were low and
that the mere presence of an armed Soviet contingent
would be a sufficient signal to compel the opponent to
adopt a policy more favorable to Moscow. Even in
these circumstances, however, Soviel leaders would
have to consider the military viability of the operation.
Soviet prestige would suffer a major blow if a Soviet
combat unit were defeated while intervening in a
distant state., Again, however, political, not military,
considerations would determine whether such combat
operations were undertaken.

115. An important factor affecting the feasibility of
airborne operations is the extent to which the transport
aircraft are threatened by opposing air defense forces.
Soviet fighter aircraft could escort the transports up to
adistance of about 700 nautical miles from their bases,
including those in countries where Soviet aircraft
might be deployed. In the absence of fighter support,
the slow-moving transports would be extremely vul-
nerable to attack from both interceptors and surface-
to-air missiles. Unless the Soviets believed they could
land and resupply an airborne force without serious
interference to their transports, the option to deploy
the units would be foreclosed.

116. Any plan to employ airborne units would also
have to address the capabilities of the units themselves.
Airborne units gain their great advantage of air trans-
portability at the expense of less firepower and ar-
mored protection. While Soviet airborne units today
are much more mobile than their predecessors, they
generally remain at a disadvantage against modern
motorized forces.

117. The speed with which the Soviets could deploy
an airborne force would depend on a number of
factors: the distance to be flown, the level and type of
opposition expected at the destination, the granting of
overflight clearances, the logistic support available,
and the degree to which preparation had already been
accomplished before the decision to deploy. (See
Annex C for a discussion of planning factors for a VTA
airlift.) in

118. If the Soviets had no time to make advance
preparations, they would be hard put to airlift a
division-size force to, say, Syria in less than a week. If,
however, they chose to make preparations in anticipa-
tion or during the development of a crisis, they
theoretically could lift a slightly reduced airborne
Page-46
SECRET

division * there in one to two days. This would require
around 600 flights, full acquiscence of Turkey or Iran
for overflight clearances, and full use of three Syrian
airfields. Such a rapid deployment would probably be
contemplated by Moscow only as a demonstration of
support for Syria in a period of tension. More realisti-
cally, then, it would probably take the Soviets three to
four days to fly a force equivalent to a reduced
airborne division to Syria.

119. The time needed to prepare airborne forces
themselves would not be a significant constraint in a
long-distance operation. Other factors that would have
more impact on the time needed to prepare for an
airborne operation are acquisition of overflight clear-
ances, obtaining necessary intelligence, preparation
and coordination of plans, and laying on of logistical
support en route.

120. While there should be numerous indications of
Soviet preparations for deployment of a large force
(such as requests for overflight clearance), once these
have been accomplished, deployment could begin on
very short notice.

Amphibious Assault Operations

121. Soviet amphibious forces were developed to
conduct assault landings on the maritime flanks of the
USSR in support of ground theater operations. With
some augmentation by other naval combatants and
auxiliaries, these forces could undertake assault oper-
ations against light opposition in many areas of the
Third World. Limited seaborne tactical air support
could be made available from the Forger V/STOL
(vertical/short takeoff and landing) fighter-bombers
deployed with Kiev-class aircraft carriers. An amphib-
ious task force might also receive tactical air support
from neighboring countries, possibly by Soviet land-
based aircraft deployed there. Even with substantial
augmentation, however, it is doubtful that a Soviet
amphibious task force could carry out a forced landing
abroad against heavy opposition, because of the lack of
adequate sea-based tactical air support, the absence of
sufficient naval gunfire support, and the vulnerability
of air and sea lines of communication. Moreover, the
Soviets lack experience in integrating all of the com-
plex facets of an assault landing beyond the Eurasian
littoral.

*A reduced airborne division includes all of the unit’s heavy
weapons, 90 percent of its men, 70 percent of its trucks, and enough
ammunition for three days of heavy fighting.

42
SECRET

lnterdiction of Sea Lines of Communication

122. We have no evidence of Soviet contingency
plans to exert political or economic pressure on the
United States or its allies through interdiction of the

sea lines of communication (SLOC) in the absence of a”

NATO-Warsaw Pact war. Soviet naval doctrine gen-
erally considers SLOC interdiction only within the
context of such a war. We believe that the Soviets do
not anticipate fighting a major naval war in other
contexts and that they realize military operations
against such vital Western interests as the sea lines
would probably lead to war with NATO.

123. In the unlikely event that the Soviets were to
opt for an interdiction strategy outside the context of a
general war with NATO, a potential target would be
the tanker routes from the Persian Gulf. One method
of executing such a decision would be to attack tankers
as they exited the Persian Gulf through the Strait of
Hormuz. In a situation in which the Western. or
regional powers were unwilling to take military action
to protect the sea lines, the Soviets could stop the
tanker traffic with even the relatively small forces
normally present in the Indian Ocean Squadron. Even
the threat of suzh action would probably be enough, in
the absence of Western counteraction, to deter any
tankers from sailing. Soviet leaders would almost
certainly believe, however, that the affected states
would take prompt and severe countermeasures to
forestall the interdiction of tanker routes. In that
event, the Indian Ocean Squadron would be extremely
vulnerable, and the Soviets would probably assign the
major role in such an interdiction campaign in the
Indian Ocean to the submarines of the Pacific Fleet.

124. Problems of sustainability and long transits
would probably convince the Soviets that an interdic-
tion campaign designed to bring economic or political
pressure would be more effective if conducted nearer
to Soviet bases. By attacking the sea lines in locations
closer to the ports of destination, such as near Western
Europe or the Luzon Strait, the Soviet Navy would be
able to bring more resources to bear, including not
only additional nuclear submarines but also the slower
and range-limited diesel boats. Even so, Soviet leaders
would expect such actions to provoke serious counter-
measures that could lead to major host
West.

 

The Monetary Cost of Distant Operations

125. Monetary costs are not a critical factor in Soviet
decisions to mount military operations in distant areas.
Page-47
—SEERET—

In the event of a distant operation, selected military
units would be diverted from their primary missions to
tailor a force suitable to the situation at hand. Most of
the costs associated with these units, including devel-
opment and procurement of weaponry and the units’
usual operating outlays, would be incurred whether or
not the units were used for a distant operation.

126. Distant operations, however, generate addi.
tional costs. For example, the cost of relocation of the
designated units and the concomitant logistic train
would increase the operating costs for these particular
units. The magnitude of these additional costs depends
to a large extent on the particular circumstances and
nature of the distant operation. In the end, however,

 

43

while the additional cost to the Soviets for a distant
operation could result in increased outlays, these costs
can be expected to be small when placed in the
‘context of Soviet spending for other defense activities.

 

127. These costs do not, of course, cover the sale and
grant of arms and other military assistance that Mos-
cow provides its clients during major operations such
as those in Angola and Ethiopia. To date the Soviets
have pledged $300-400 million of military support to
the Angolan regime (excluding Cuban aid) and around
$2 billion to Ethiopia. These commitments and deliv-
cries of equipment are at least partially recovered
through hard currency and barter repayment pro-
grams. Some are not recovered at all.
Page-48
IV. OUTLOOK

A. Likelihood and Nature of Future Soviet
Distant Operations

128. Although a change in the makeup of the top
leadership is highly probable in the next five
years and virtually certain in the next 10, we do not
believe that -Soviet policies or long-term ‘objectives
toward the Third World will change substantially on
those grounds alone. We do not foresee the present or
any -likely future Soviet leadership fundamentally
altering these objectives to secure short-term economic
or political benefits from the West. Although future
Soviet leaders will attach varying degrees of impor-
tance to detente relations with the United States and
other Western powers, we believe it unlikely that
Soviet leaders will be any more dissuaded from pursu-
ing opportunities in the Third World in the future
than in the recent past by concern over adverse effects
on detente. Indeed, Soviet leaders probably will con-
tinue to calculate that major issues like the strategic
arms limitations talks will be largely unaffected and
that costs in less critical areas of US-Soviet relations

will be bearable.

129. We believe the Soviets will persist in a steady
course of creating and exploiting opportunities in
distant areas, utilizing wherever possible their com-
parative advantages in military instruments of influ-
ence. They will continue to regard military means—
principally arms sales, military assistance, and support
of insurgent movements—as the most feasible way of
bringing about the changes they seek in the political
structure of the Third World. The following para-
graphs assess prospects for expanding Soviet influence
in the Third World through military activities. This is
a generalized assessment and does not preclude, espe-
cially in the long run, opportunities that could develop
from events which are now unforeseen or considered
unlikely.

   

Areas of Operations

130. Southeast Asia. Soviet support of Vietnam—
and the Friendship Treaty of November 1978—gave
Hanoi significant external backing for its invasion of
Kampuchea (Cambodia) in December 1978. Nonethe-

44
—SECRET—

less, Hanoi remains fiercely independent and Soviet
influence in the region will remain largely dependent
on Hanoi's sufferance. Soviet arms sales and economic
assistance to Vietnam will probably increase as Hanoi
faces the problems of solidifying its position in Kam-
puchea and restructuring the economics of both coun-
tries. Hanoi is unlikely to grant the Soviets any formal
base rights in either Vietnam or Kampuchea but is
permitting some Soviet access to air and naval facili-
ties. Elsewhere in the region, prospects for expanding
Soviet influence are not favorable.

131. South Asia. Moscow in all likelihood will
maintain its position in South Asia over the next few
years,

— There is no question that the Soviets have gained

‘substantially in Afghanistan as a result of last
April's change of government there and that
Soviet influence in that country probably will
continue to increase if the present group remains
in power. However, the closer the Afghans move
to the Soviets, the better the chances that Soviet
influence elsewhere in the region will suffer. __

India has been seeking to make Indian foreign
policy more genuinely nonaligned by improving
relations with both China and the West and by
reducing its dependence on the USSR for arms
aid. Nonetheless, New Delhi still maintains close
relations with Moscow.

In Bangladesh, the assassination of President
Mujib in August 1975 set back Moscow's: warm
relations with that developing nation. Since No-
vember 1975, Dacca has sought to strengthen
relations with the West and China and maintain
correct, but cool, ties with the Soviets.

Improved dealings between the USSR-and Paki-
stan have been given some impetus both by
Pakistani unhappiness with the United States
and by a belief among some Pakistani officials
that Islamabad has no alternative but to turn to
Moscow. But, Pakistan's close relations with Iran
and. China, its deep suspicion of Soviet intentions
in South Asia, and Moscow's greater interest in
Page-49
SECRET

Pakistan’s main rivals—Afghanistan and India—
all seem to preclude a significant improvement
in relations.

132. Over the longer term, the ability of any outside
bower to influence South Asian developments may
diminish. India is already the dominant power in the
region, and the stronger it becomes, the more it will
insist on being dealt with as a significant power, and
the less it will brook outside interference in what it
regards as its rightful sphere of interest.

Middle East. Opportunities to expand Sovict
the Middle Kast will depend mainly on

  

the evolution of the Arab-Israeli peace process and the
course of events in Iran. Over the longer term, under«

 

lying antagonisms toward, and deepening suspicions
of, Moscow's motives will qualify Soviet prospects.
Soviet opportunities could greatly improve, however,
if events in the Middle East raise the likelihood of
renewed hostilities. As a result of the instability in
Iran, the Soviets undoubtedly anticipate significant
changes there and in the conservative regimes of the
Persian Gulf area that will lead to opportunities for
new Soviet ties with the oil-producing states and to
further reduction of Western influence. Moreover, in
the event of continued civil conflict in Iran, the Soviets
may well support one faction in. hopes of replacing US
influence. In any case, Soviet military assistance pro-
grams in this region will retain their fairly high profile.

134, Latin America. Opportunities in Latin Amer-
ica are less favorable than in other regions of the Third
World, except for the continuing Soviet role in Cuba.
The Soviets have made some economic and diplomatic
inroads into Latin America since the Central Commit-
tee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union issued
a resolution in mid-1974 declaring this region an arena
for Soviet-US competition. Although there will un-
doubtedly be incidents and turmoil that should lend
themselves to exploitation, prospects are still limited
by prevalent anti-Communist sentiment and the
USSR's inability to provide the kinds of nonmilitary
assistance Latin Americans need. The anti-US nation-
alism often present in this area and negative reactions
to US policy on human rights have indirectly aided
Moscow, but most Latin American governments are
wary of Soviet overtures and are concerned as much
about Soviet expansionism as about US regional influ-
ence. Sales of Soviet military hardware offer some

opportunities. So far, only Peru has purchased Soviet -

weapons in significant quantities, but there is no
evidence that this has given the Soviets much influ-
ence with Peruvian policymakers.

45
SECRER

138, (This paragraph of the earlier version of NIE
11-10-79 addressed Soviet military presence
in Cuba. In view of events related to this
matter since issuance of the Estimate, the
paragraph has been deleted. The reader ts
directed to more recent intelligence publica-
tions for information and judgments on this
subject.]

136. Africa. The best opportunities for ‘expanding
Soviet influence will probably continue to lie in
Africa, where political instability is commonplace and
where conditions that promote subversion and insure
xencies will remain rife. Soviet leaders are pleased
with the course their assertive and opportunistic policy
has taken in Africa and, as their long-range expecta-
tions are on the rise there, they are unlikely to change
that policy significantly. Their efforts in Angola and
Ethiopia have tended to reinforce their view of them-
selves as upholders of a preordained, long-term histori-
cal process in which power and influence around the
world are gradually shifting from the West to the
Soviet Union. This has strengthened their determina-
tion to stick with their present policy. Furthermore,
they will regard the constancy and singlemindedness
of their policy as giving them a decided advantage—if
not ensuring their eventual success—over the Western
nations.

187. Soviet policy will not overlook the smaller, less
important African states. For example, Benin, a tiny
country on the southern coast of West Africa led by a
radical, anti-Western, dedicated Marxist, has received
increased amounts of Soviet military equipment and
additional Cuban and Soviet advisers over the past
year. Its acceptance of Soviet and Cuban assistance
tepresents a tactical advance—a strengthening of So-
viet and a weakening of Western influence in the
Third, World. Benin is a potential base for future
support of insurgencies in nearby states and would be
of some military value to the Soviets if they were
granted access there to air and naval facilities.

138. At least over the next 10 years, Moscow foresees
a sequence of protracted struggles for power by black
liberation movements in Rhodesia, Namibia, and
South Africa which it expects will place the West
increasingly on the defensive politically and which it
intends to use to enlarge the USSR’s role and that of its
allies. Soviet expectations in southern Africa are fueled
by Moscow's perception of the dilemma facing the
West in attempting to broker nonviolent political
settlements in the region. Should Western political
efforts fail, the Soviets will make every effort to
Page-50
~SECREF—

establish themselves as the dominant external patrons
of the black nationalists.

189. The Cuban intervention in Angola and espe-
cially Ethiopia has probably strengthened Soviet con!
dence in the feasibility and effectiveness of this strat-
egy and enhanced its appeal among political and
military leaders in both Moscow and Havana, who
probably will be encouraged to press this strategy.
Soviet and Cuban leaders probably will believe that, as
long as such action does not portray them as invaders
and does not threaten the West's allies or its sources of
vital raw materials, the risk of Western military
involvement and escalation to a wider conflict will be
slight.

140. Where Cuban or other friendly forces are not
available for use in the Third World or are deemed
unsuitable, Moscow would have the option of using its
own ground forces. Although Soviet air, naval, and air
defense forces have been involved in conflicts in the
Middle East, Angola, and Ethiopia, Soviet. ground
combat units have not. Growing Soviet self-confidence
in projecting power and in the USSR’s role as a global
power will diminish whatever Soviet reluctance may
have existed in the past to employ ground forces
outside the Warsaw Pact. At the same time, there are
limited situations in which allied forces would not be
preferable from a Soviet point of view; Afghanistan is
one where the provision of limited Soviet ground
forces in a hurry might well be undertaken. Neverthe-
less, the Soviet leadership would probably view the use
of ground combat units, even in modest numbers, as a
significant escalation of Soviet involvement. The major
constraints would be concern over the likelihood of
Western or regional counteraction and the impact on
Third World perceptions of Soviet policy. We believe,
therefore, that Moscow would employ ground combat
units only where, and to the degree, it considered such
action essential to preserve vital Soviet interests in the
region.

141. Where the risks of intervention with allied or
even Soviet forces are greater than in Angola or

 

Ethiopia, Soviet leaders are likely to forgo that meas- -

ure and to rely instead, as they have in the past, on less
provocative military means. They will be especially

-» alert to signs that the United States and other Western
powers have reached the point where they can no
longer withhold their direct involvement in support of
endangered governments.

46
SEER

Weaknesses and Alternatives

142. Soviet efforts to project power and influence in
the Third World through military means will continue
to labor under the same weaknesses as in the past
(discussed under “Policy Appraisal,” beginning at
paragraph 10, in chapter I). Preservation of-influence
gained will remain the overriding problem. Many
Third World leaders will remain suspicious of Soviet
motives and probably would be reluctant clients of the
Kremlin. Many of those who do accept Soviet assist-
ance can be expected to react against instances of
exploitative military agreements, poor-quality assist-
ance and training, and interference in internal affairs.
Moscow will be particularly conscious of the strength
of conservative and anti-Soviet forces in Africa, Latin
America, and the Middle East and is sensitive to the
misgivings which a number of African leaders have
begun to voice concerning the continued presence of
Soviet and Cuban military personnel in Angola and
Ethiopia. Wider use of Cuban intervention forces in
Africa could well deepen these apprehensions.’

143. Soviet leaders also know that without a strong, .

durable pro-Soviet political base in a country, even
where Soviet influence is strongest, the USSR is vulner-
able to unpredictable changes in the local political
leadership or in its attitudes. To preserve Soviet
influence in a country where, for example, depend-
ence on Soviet military support has diminished or
expulsion of Soviet military personnel is threatened,
Moscow has essentially three alternatives beyond con-
tinuation of present policies:

— The first would be to use friendly outside forces
like Cubans more extensively to carry out Mos-
cow's policies. If these forces were expelled,
Moscow might evade complicity in the actions
which led to their expulsion and salvage what-
ever influence it had acquired. The danger for
the Soviets is that the outside forces will-usurp
this influence and work to their own benefit at
Moscow’s expense.

— A second alternative—evidently being imple-
mented in Afghanistan and attempted in Angola—
is to seek to acquire through Soviet advisers
sufficient control of the military and internal
security forces to prevent the leaders of the
client state from taking actions (such as the
expulsion of Soviet personnel) that are in conflict
with Soviet interests. This approach too has its

“Annex D discusses perception of Soviet military power in various
regions of the Third World,
Page-51
SECRET

drawbacks, as the behavior of Soviet advisers in
the Third World has in almost every region
antagonized and offended client governments,
thereby jeopardizing the advances the Soviets
have made.

A third alternative is to garrison Soviet troops in
the client: state, at its invitation, ostensibly to
protect the client against some external threat
but in reality to preserve in power a government
that is friendly and beholden to Moscow and
that will enforce policies in line with Soviet
interests. The deployment of Soviet troops to a
Third World nation under these circumstances
would have unforeseeable ramifications for So-
viet foreign relations. It is nonetheless an option
which conceivably might attract serious consid-
eration by Soviet decisionmakers. The deploy-
ment of Soviet forces for this purpose, however,
would be a drastic departure from the policy
Moscow has followed in the Third World. That
policy generally seeks to bring about changes in
the world order through small, sometimes un-
noticeable steps that will not galvanize the West-
to take strong countermeasures, possibly in con-
cert with Third World states or even China.
Such a reaction could strengthen the very facets
of Western capabilities that Soviet policy has
sought to weaken, such as military alliances and
political and economic cooperation aimed
against the Soviet Union.

144. Most African leaders, however, regard Soviet
military and political involvement in the internal
affairs of African states as interference and will be
disposed to inveigh and take countermeasures against
such activities where black liberation struggles prevail
and Soviet assistance becomes nonessential. In those
cases where liberation struggles gradually evolve from
armed conflicts into peaceful programs for social and
economic reforms and national development, African
sensitivities to the nature and extent of continued
Soviet or Cuban involvement in black Africa will
probably become acute. African opinion has been
generally tolerant of Moscow's military ventures on
the continent, where the Soviets were seen as helping
one African state fend off attack from another, pre-
serving national boundaries, and assisting national
liberation movements. Soviet policy in the Third
World feeds on political turbulence, military conflict,
and civil strife. During the next 10 years, disruptions
are likely to continue, especially in Africa and the
Middle East, and the major role the Soviets have

 

effectively played—a source of arms and military
assistance and a protector of clients—will remain
relevant to the needs of many countries,

Reaction to Economic Problems .

145. Continuing economic problems are forecast for
the Soviet Union in the 1980s.'® As the impact of these
problems intensifies, they will reinforce the perception
among Soviet decisionmakers that the USSR cannot
compete across the board with the West in the eco-
nomic field for influence in the Third World. In
addition to these economic problems, the USSR. may
be unable over the next several years to produce
enough oil to satisfy Soviet and most East European
energy requirements and simultaneously to export oil
for hard currency. While some measures that could
provide short-term relief are conceivable—such as
reducing the growth of Soviet energy consumption,
spending hard currency for oil, and seeking additional
barter arrangements to finance imports of oil—they
would be unlikely to resolve the Soviet dilemma.

146. The ultimate impact would be a lower rate,of
Soviet economic growth which, if not rectified, could
have serious economic and probably political conse-
quences for the Soviét Union in the long run. In
addition, a drop in Soviet oil production would cause
severe energy problems for most East European coun-
tries and confront them with painful policy choices as
well. But we believe it is extremely unlikely that

problems created by an oil shortage in the USSR ~~

during the period of this Estimate would cause the
Soviet economic position to become so bad that the
Soviet leadership would risk an invasion of a Third
World country to gain access to oil. Moscow realizes
that a seizure of oil production facilities by Soviet or
Soviet-allied military forces would be an act of war
that at a minimum would fundamentally jeopardize
the USSR’s relations with all other countries and, in
the Soviet view, would likely result in Western mili--
tary counteraction.

B. Options for the Development and Deployment
of Forces for Distant Operations

147. We do not foresee any rapid change in Soviet
capabilities for distant operations during the period of

"* These problems include sharp reduction in the growth of the
labor force, declining rates of capital productivity, an inefficient
and undependable agriculture, and a limited capacity to earn hard
currency to pay for needed technology imports and intermittent
massive grain purchases. :

—SECRE—
Page-52
—SECRE—

this Estimate, nor do we expect that the primary focus
of Soviet military programs will shift from prepara-
tions for war with NATO and China. We believe,
however, that, although the Soviets are unlikely to
conduct assault operations against Third World coun-
tries, they consider an improved capability for distant
operations to be desirable and that gradual improve-
ments will be made in those naval, air, and airborne
forces best suited for such operations.

Navy

148. We expect the Soviets to press forward during
the next decade with the development of géneral
purpose naval forces. Although the total number of
surface combatants in the Soviet Navy is expected to
decline slightly over this period, improvements will
take place in the Navy's capabilities for air defense,
antiship, and antisubmarine warfare. These improve-
ments in combatant forces will be paralleled by. those
in logistic support ships with a trend toward larger,
more seaworthy units with increased capabilities for
rapid replenishment and self-defense. We believe,
however, the Soviets will continue to have préblems in
detecting enerhy submarines, in providing targeting
assistance for the effective use.of many antisubmarine
and antiship weapons, and in replenishing ships at sea.

149. The capability of the Soviet amphibious forces
for distant operations is expected to improve through
the continuation of current building programs and the
introduction of new designs. By the 1980s these pro-
grams will increase the total tonnage of Soviet amphib-
ious ships.

— The Polish-built, 3,400-ton Ropucha-class has

been delivered to the Soviets at the rate of two to
three per year. The Ropucha is smaller than its
predecessor, the Alligator, but, unlike earlier
Soviet amphibious ships, this unit appears to
provide troop quarters adequate for long periods
at sea.
Following the completion of the Ropucha pro-
gram, a new class of amphibious ship is expected
to enter the inventory at the rate of about two
ber year in the early-to-mid-1980s.

More significant, however, is the construction at
Kaliningrad of the 13,000-ton Ivan Rogov class.
The first unit of this class, which has more than
. twice the displacement of any previous Soviet
design, is operational, and about four more will
be. constructed over the next 10 years. The
Rogov class is a significant departure in amphib-

48
—SEEREF—

ious ship design for the Soviets. With its liniited
shore bombardment and air defense capabilities,
a capacity for six Hormone small naval helicop.
ters, space for carrying air cushion assault craft,
and accommodations for a fully equipped”
500-man battalion landing team, the ship is well
suited for maintaining a self-contained assault
unit in forward deployments—a capability
which the Soviets have previously lacked. -

 

150. The acquisition of roll-on/roll-off merchant
ships will also improve Soviet capabilities for the
projection of power. These ships can rapidly offload
wheeled and tracked vehicles wherever piers: are
available and, in the case of amphibious vehicles,
possibly directly into the water.

151. A deficiency which limits Soviet capabilities
for distant intervention is in tactical air support, a
prerequisite for successful assault operations. The
Soviets are improving their capability somewhat in
this area through the production of the Navy's Forger
V/STOL (vertical/short takeoff and landing) fighter-
bomber, which is carried aboard the two operational
Kiev-class aircraft carriers. This aircraft gives the
Soviets an initial, though limited, capability for sea-
based ground attack as well as some air defense. The
aircraft would, however, perform poorly against high-
performance Western and Soviet-built aircraft found
in the inventories of many Third World countries. The
normal complement of aircraft on the Kiev carriers is
about 20 to 80 helicopters and about 15 Forger

fighter-bombers.

152. The Soviets will certainly undertake a program
to replace the Forger in the long term with more
advanced, probably supersonic aircraft which may be
operational by the mid-1980s. The Kiev-class aircraft
carriers probably will be followed in the mid-1980s by
a larger class of ship capable of carrying more aircraft.
By 1988 the Soviets are expected to have a total of five
fixed-wing aircraft ¢arriers in addition to their two
Moskva-class helicopter cruisers. By the late 1980s,
there is a good chance the Soviets will have adapted
existing helicopters, or developed new ones, for a
number of amphibious warfare tasks, including beach
assault by vertical envelopment.

153. The Soviets apparently also see a need for a
continued naval shore bombardment capability. They
recently introduced a new 100-mm gun on some
frigates, and an even larger naval gun may be installed
as the main armament on a new cruiser class. The first
ship of this class was launched in December 1978 and
Page-53
could be operational by mid-1980. During the next 10
years, however, many older cruisers and destroyers
armed with 152-mm and 130-mm guns will be retired
or will be approaching the end of their service life.
Nevertheless, along with expected improvements in
naval aviation, naval gunfire support will be an impor-
tant factor in Soviet capability for direct assault ashore
against opposition,

Ai Forces

154. The transport arm (VTA) of the Soviet Air
Force is expected to undergo a significant moder
tion during the next 10 ‘years. VTA’s capabilities will
continue to be enhanced by acquisition of [L-76
Candid jet aircraft—a total of 270 by the late 1980s.
The Candid can carry twice the payload and has three
times the range of the AN-12 Cub, which it is
replacing.

   

155. The Soviets are reportedly developing a new
wide-body jet transport that will probably be roughly
equivalent to the C-5A. This program, if successful,
will improve VTA’s capability to transport outsized
cargo such as medium tanks. We expect this aircraft to
become operational in the early-to-mid-1980s.

156. We believe the Soviets will perceive a require-
ment to replace the Cub transport in VTA in both
number and mission, and by the mid-to-late 1980s will
make operational a new medium transport aircraft.
We think this development will meet the Soviets’ need
for a large VTA force to maintain their current
capability to perform support missions.

157. The Soviets are likely to continue to rely on
friendly Third World countries for refueling stops for
operations in distant areas, especially resupply mis-
sions. As long as the Soviets can obtain such landing
clearances en route, they will probably not need the
capability to fly long distances in the Eastern Hemi-
sphere without refueling. If, however, the Soviets
anticipated losing landing clearances, or they expected
to encounter landing problems or excessive delays,
they could pursue-development of an in-flight refuel-
ing capability.

158. Soviet fighter-bomber aircraft at this time lack
an air-to-air refueling capability, a factor which limits
their ability to provide air support in distant areas.
Soviet tactical aviation, however, will probably devel-
op an air-to-air refueling capability.

159. Currently, VTA has a reasonably good capabil-
ity to respond rapidly to crisis situations with little or

49
—SECRER—

no warning and subsequently ‘to conduct large-scale’:

transport operations. Yet, the constraints on VTA's |
capabilities (discussed in paragraph 103) could create”
problems in long-distance airlifts requiring heavy pay-
loads. The Soviets certainly are aware of these-con-—
straints, and we believe they have embarked on a
modernization program for VTA that, while maintain-
ing a force near its current size, will enable it over the
next decade to increase its lift capability. Assuming
that the Candid will be deployed in the number we
expect, and that a new wide-body jet transport and a
new medium assault transport are deployed, the
VTA's payload capability could increase by as much as

 

.50 percent by the late 1980s.

 

 

160. Airborne divisions, along with other ground
units, are undergoing some modernization, as pre-
viously mentioned (see paragraph 92). These improve-
ments—mainly the introduction of self-propelled artil-
lery, shoulder-fired air defense missiles, and modern,
highly mobile combat vehicles and rocket launchers—
will make airborne divisions increasingly potent inter-
vention forces. Improvements in air transport and
tactical air forces will further increase Soviet ability to
use airborne forces in distant areas. .

161. Over the next 10 years the Soviets will continue
to make modest improvements in amphibious lift,
logistic support ships, naval tactical air support, gun
fire support, and airlift. Such improvements, when
added to current naval, airborne, naval infantry, and

command and control resources, will result in an

increased ability to deploy forces in distant areas and
to come to the assistance of any ally. For example, the
Soviets might introduce an airborne or naval infantry
unit at the invitation of a government, particularly if
Moscow believed there was little danger of Western
reaction and that the intensity of combat would be low
or the presence of an armed Soviet contingent would
be sufficient to accomplish Moscow's objectives.

162. We believe, however, that the Soviets are
unlikely to invade a Third World country. They have
never mounted an airborne assault or amphibious
assault operation in a distant area. Nevertheless, Soviet
forces have long been capable of undertaking such an
operation against the light opposition which could be
expected in most areas, and the above-projected im-
provements will expand this capability. But, over the
next decade, the Soviets will still not have built the
forces capable of transporting, landing, and sustaining
a large joint assault operation against substantial oppo-
sition in the Third World.
Page-54
—SEGRET—

C. Future Military Sales and Assistance

163. We do not foresee any diminution in the Soviet
military sales and assistance programs, which should
continue to flourish. Neither the political nor the
commercial interests of the USSR would be served by
a radical change in policy that would deny arms or
advisers to Third World states. Indeed, arms transfers
will remain the principal Soviet entree to most of these
countries. We expect Moscow to sell arms so long as
opportunities exist and to strike hard bargains that
earn maximum returns in hard currency. Moscow's
major customers—Afghanistan, Algeria, Ethiopia, {n-
dia, Iraq, Libya, Peru, and Syria—are likely to remain
dependent on Soviet weaponry and military equip-
ment for at least the next five years. The extent to
which opportunities to expand the Soviet market will
increase will depend largely on the willingness of
Western suppliers to sell arms to Third World nations.
Where Western equipment cannot be obtained or the
price is too high, the demand for Soviet hardware will
rise. In any event, Arab ambitions to achieve superior:
ity in military equipment over Israel will for some
time bring pressure on Moscow for more modern
arms. 7 :

164. Although India will continue to strive for self-
sufficiency in arms production, it will remain reliant
on outside support for technologically advanced
weapon systems. In selecting weapon systems, India
will seek the best-deal, whether offered by the West or
the Soviets. Should India cease to acquire Soviet arms,

50

its current military modernization programs would
suffer until it could obtain alternatives for the weapon
systems currently projected to be supplied by the
USSR. However, because of its indigenous production
capability, its favorable foreign reserve balance, and
the availability of Western arms as an alternative
source, India’s overall military effectiveness would not
be seriously degraded.

165. Peru as well, despite misgivings about the
quality and intentions of Soviet aid, is deeply commit-
ted financially and could not easily disengage from
Soviet support for more than $630 million in arms that
it has purchased in the past decade. Nor could Peru
switch to other arms suppliers without largely sacrific-
ing the tremendous financial investment it has made
in Soviet equipment, without disrupting ongoing mili-
tary modernization programs, and without degrading
military capabilities for a period of several years
during a transition to different hardware.

166. In general, most Third World countries will
continue to prefer non-Communist arms. Major shifts
from the West will reflect the disinclination or the
inability of the supplier to fill Third World orders.
Requirements of the big Western customers will prob-
ably continue to be met by the Western arms export-
ers. We see no immediate dramatic expansion by the
Soviets into the other Western.arms markets—South
Asia and Latin America. In any event, these markets
are small and would not sustain orders for Soviet
equipment at the high levels noted from Middle
Eastern and North African countries.
Page-55
ANNEX A

SELECTIVE CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS RELATED TO SOVIET
MILITARY ACTIVITIES IN THE THIRD WORLD—1954-78

1955

1958

1958-61
1962
1963

1963-64

1965

1966

Jun 1967

Jun-Jul 1967

Nov 1967-
Jan 1968

Dec 1967

Mar 1968

Apr 1968

Jun 1968

Soviet marketing of arms to Thied World countries began, with sale to
Egyot through Czechoslovakia.

Pro-Western Iraqi Government was overthrown. New regime was Arab
sationalist and “nonaligned,” and established diplomatic relations with
the USSR. 7

Soviets operated a diesel submarine base at Saseno, Albania.

Cuban missile crisis.

Iraqi Government overthrown. The new regime verbally attacked the
international Communist movement, violently repressed the local Com-
munist party, and stepped up military operations against Soviet-backed
Kurdish insurgents. In retaliation, Moscow slowed and then stopped its
military deliveries to Iraq, causing a sizable’ dimiaution in Iraat
operations against the Kurds. When the Iraqis subsequentiy ceased their
anti-Communist propaganda and reduced their repression of local
Communists, the USSR agreed to resume arms shipments.

Soviet naval forces established permanent presence in the
Mediterranean. 7

The abortive ‘coup attempt in Indonesia by the Indonesian Communist
Party supported by China caused Moscow to lose practically all of its
investments in costly military and economic aid programs there, for
which the Soviets have never been repaid.

Ghana’s President Nkrumah—a staunch ally of the Soviet Union—was
ousted, and only recently (1977) has Moscow begun to reestablish its
influence there.

During the Arab-Israeli war the Soviets increased the number of
missile-launching surface ships in the Mediterrancan from two to five
and used them to trail one British-and two US carriers. Other ships also
augmented the Soviet naval squadron in the Mediterranean, and some
took up positions near"US ships.

Military Transport Aviation (VTA) airlift to Egypt.
VTA airlift to North Yemen.

North Yemen: Soviet pilots flew combat and supply missions on behalf
of republican forces putting down an insurrection by royalist support-
ers. This is believed to have been the first direct involvement of Soviet
combat personnel in the Arab states,

Soviet naval: ships éstablished near-continuous presence in the Indian
Ocean. 7

Soviet naval units began periodic visits to Mogadishu and, later in the
year, to other Somali ports.

Soviet naval ships began regular calls at Aden, South Yemen, for
replenishment, crew rest, water, and minor maintenance. They also
began regular use of the Iraqi port of Al Basrah,

SI
—SEERET—
Page-56
1968-72

Feb 1969

Apr 1969-
Aug 1970

Jul 1969

Since 1970
Apr 1970
Jul 1970

Jul 1970
Sep-Oct 1970

‘Aug 1970
Sep 1970
Nov 1970

Dec 1970-
Feb 1971

May 1971

Aug 1971
Dec 1971

Feb 1972

Ape 1972

The Soviets gradually built up « permanent deployment of naval aie
unit Egypt. They piloted TU-16 Badger reconnaissance and {L-38
May antisubmarine warfare (ASW) aircraft on regular patrols over the
Mediterranean, stored air-to-sutface missiles at Aswan, and were pre-
bared to station Badger naval strike aircraft in Ezvot.

Soviet naval ships began regular use of the [raai port of Umm Qasr for
logistic support,

Egyot’s “war of attrition.” Soviet military manpower in Egypt cose
from less than 4,000 in January 1970 to more than 13,000 in July 1970,
The number peaked in mid-1971 at more than 15,000, of which some
8,300 were combat personnel, primarily in surface-to-air missile units,
This number declined thereafter, as Egyptians manned the Soviet air
defense equipment. Some 60 MIG-21 fighters and pilots were airlifted
to Egypt, where they flew combat air defense missions and performed
their own maintenance and logistics. A Soviet MIC-25 Foxbat detach-
ment was deployed to Eeyot and performed reconnaissance missions
along the Suez Canal. In July 1970, four Soviet pilots flying MIC-21s
were shot down over Egypt by Israeli fighters.

Soviet naval units visited Cuba for the first time since the missile crisis
in 1962,

Limited use of Algerian port of Annaba by Soviet naval units

First deployment of Soviet TU-95 reconnaissance aircraft to Cubs,
The abortive pro-Communist coup in Sudan and the subsequent purge
of Communists and sympathizers from the government and the execu-
tion of the coup leaders—including the secretary general of the

  

- Communist Party—resulted in the withdrawal of Soviet military per

sonnel from the country and termination of military assistance, dashing
any long-range Soviet plans to use Sudanese airfields and port facilities
for larger strategic purposes in the Middle East and Indian Ocean.
VTA airlift to Peru,

Jordanian crisis. Soviet deployments of major naval combatants to the
Mediterranean increased (from two cruisers and three destroyers to four
cruisers and nine destroyers), and Soviet ships took up positions near US
ships in the eastern Mediterranean.

Soviet ‘naval facility under construction at Cienfuegos, Cuba,

Nasser died, and Sadat began his rise to power as Egyptian President.
First deployment of Soviet naval ships off West Africa.

VTA airlift to Pakistan.

  

Egyptian-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed. Despite
the treaty, Sadat grew wary of Soviet influence. Moscow delayed or
reneged on commitments to deliver weapon systems, particularly those
mest “coveted by the Egyptians, pending an improvement in Sadat's
policies toward the USSR. This Soviet tactic backfired, as Sadat's
resentment at this treatment reinforced his resistance to Soviet pressure.
Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed.
Indo-Pakistani war. The United States and the Soviet Union each.
deployed additional naval forces to the Indian Ocean. Following the
arrival of the US aircraft carrier Enterprise, four Soviet cruise-missile-
equipped units reached the scene. The Soviets maintained surveillance
‘of both US and British naval forces in the Indian Ocean.

A Soviet ballistic missile submarine—a diesel-powered C-Il—visited
Cuba for the fiest time, putting into the port of Antilla. The only other
ballistic missile unit—also 1 G-II—to make a port call in Cuba was in
April 1974, in Havana harbor.

Iragi-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed.

52
—SECRER
Page-57
Jul 1972

Oct 1972

Jul 1973
Oct 1973

Oct 1973

1974

Apr 1974
Mid-1974

Dec 1974

1974-75,

1974-76

Aor 1975
Jun 1975
Oct 1975-

Mar 1976
Nov 1975
Dec 1975

Dec 1975

Dec 1975

Early 1976

Ape 1976

Ape 1976

Sadat ordered the bulk of Soviet military personnel in Egypt to
withdraw—including ground, air, air defense, naval air, and some naval
forces. Soviet naval units for the most past remained at Alexandria.
Soviets began expanding port and POL storage facilities at Berbera,
Somalia.

First deployment of Soviet TU-95 reconnaissance aircraft to Guinea.
Middle East war. The Soviets doubled their naval forces’in the
Mediterranean (to 98 units, including more cruise missile units) and
increased surveillance of the US 6th Fleet. Soviet ships took no
provocative actions. Soviet deployment of combat units other than naval
was limited to a few Soviet-manned surface-to-air missile units in Syria.
Soviet officers took an active part in operational decisionmaking in the
Syrian General Staff. At the same time Soviet advisers supervised
ical operations of Syrian and trai Army units and were actively
wolved in the operation of Egyptian air defense radar nets. VTA
airlift.

Cuba sent an armored brigade, medical detachment, and contingent of
pilots to Syria after the outbreak of the fighting. This was clearly a joint
effort with the Soviets. Cuba provided the personnel; the USSR
provided the aircraft and other equipment.

Roll-on/roll-off cargo ships were introduced into the Soviet merchant
fleet.

Soviet-Somali Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed.

Soviet Party Central Committee resolution on Latin America, stating in
effect that Moscow neo longer viewed Latin America as a sphere of
strictly US influence but rather as an arena for Soviet-US competition.
First Soviet naval combaiant (an F-class diesel submarine) began
overhaul at Tivat, Yugoslavia, subsequent to the change in June 1973 of
the Yugoslav maritime law to permit repair of foreign naval ships.
Final stage of Iraqi-Kurdish war. Soviet pilots reportedly flew combat
bombing missions against the Kurds, but took care not to cross the
Iranian border.

Angolan civil war (see chronology of events in table 7 of chapter II).

Soviet IL-38 May ASW aircraft began periodic visits to Somalia.
Suez Canal reopened.
VTA airlift to Angola.

 

  

Modest VTA airlift of military equipment to South Yemen for the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Oman (PFLO).

‘The PFLO, supported by the Soviets since 1969, was defeated by a
combined force of Omanis and Iranians.

The few Soviet naval ships operating off the West African coast near
Conakry were augmented to include a guided missile and
déstroyer, 2 landing ship, a diesel submarine, and several auxiliaries, to
support the Cuban intervention in Angola

‘The Soviets moored a large floating drydock in the harbor at Berbera,
Somalia, for use by ships of their Indian Ocean Squadron.

Soviet diesel submarines began anchoring regularly at Annaba, Algeria,
for minor maintenance and repair from a Soviet submarine tender that
usually accompanies them.

Sadat abrogated the Soviet-Egyptian friendship treaty‘and ordered the
remaining Soviet military personnel—mainly naval—to leave Egypt by
mid-April.

Syrian forces occupied northern Lebanon. Syria's intervention angered
Soviet leaders and resulted in a slowdown in Soviet arms deliveries for
cight months,

 

53
SECRET
Page-58
Oct 1976
Oct 1976
Dec 1976
Jan 1977

Jan 1977

Feb 1977
Mar-Apr 1977

Early 1977
May 1977
Jun 1977

Jun 1977

Nov 1977

Nov 1977-
May 1978

Jan-Feb 1978

Apr 1978
Apr 1978
Jun 1978
May 1978

Jul 1978

Jul 1978

Jul-Aug 1978
Aug-Sep 1978

Nov_1978
Nov 1978

Late Nov-
Early Dee 1978

—SECRET—

Soviet-Angolan Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed.

Two Soviet TU-95 reconnaissance aircraft deployed to Somalia.

A Soviet naval repair ship took up station off Luanda, Angola.

Soviet TU-95 reconnaissance aircraft began periodic deployments to
Angola,

A Soviet destroyer and tanker visited Maputo, Mozambique, at the
vitation of the Mozambique Covernment. This was the first visit by a
Soviet naval detachment to this country.

Soviet naval units began frequent visits to Benin.

Soviet President Podgorny visited Tanzania, Zambia, and Mozam-
bique—the first visit to southern Africa by so senior a member of the
Soviet hierarchy. Soviet-Mazambique Treaty of Friendship and Coaper-
ation signed .

Soviets reportedly began operating the naval base at Luanda, Angola.
Expulsion of Soviet military advisers from Sudan.

Soviet naval ships began using Menzel Bourguiba (Manzil Bu Raqaybah)
shipyard in Tunisia.

Guinea prohibited further TU-95 reconnaissance flights from Conakry
but continued to allow Soviet military air transports to land and Soviet
naval ships to use certain port facilities.

Somalia, for years Moscow's favored client in the Horn of Africa,
abrogated its friendship treaty with the USSR and expelled all Soviet
military personnel in retaliation for Moscow's support of Ethiopia. This
action cost the USSR its access to Somali airfields and the port at
Berbera. The drydock at Berbera was towed to Aden, South Yemen, and
the communications station was dismantled.

VTA airlift to Ethiopia. VTA transports were assigned to Ethiopia for
in-country logistic flights.

Ethiopian-Somali conflict. The Soviets augmented their Indian Ocean
squadron from an average of 18 (including four to five combatants) to
peak of 32 ships (including 13 combatants). A number of ships of the
squadron were deployed to the southern Red Sea to assist in the delivery
of supplies to Ethiopia and to provide security for Soviet and Ethiopian
shipping involved in the sealift. (For other Soviet involvement see
chronology of events in table 8 of chapter II.)

Soviet drydock at Aden towed to the Red Sea, off Ethiopi2.

Pro-Soviet coup in Afghanistan.

  

Pro-Soviet coup in ‘South Yemen.

The first Soviet MIG-23 Flogger jet fighter-bombers were identified in
Cuba.

‘Three Soviet IL-18s flew from the USSR to Hanoi, probably ferrying
Soviet technicians to replice Chinese. 7

VTA AN-12s were stationed in South Yemen. A Soviet communications
station was constructed there, apparently as a replacement for the
station the Soviets lost in Somalia,

Soviet MIG-25 Foxbat interceptors were delivered to Libya—the first
delivery of this sircraft to 2 Third World country.

Foxbats were delivered to Algeria, which reportedly will receive a
squadron.

Soviet-Vietnamese Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed.
Soviet-Ethiopian Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed.
Soviet naval AN-12 transports and IL-38 May ASW aircraft deployed to
Aden. This was the first appearance of Soviet tactical aircraft in South
Yemen.

54
—SECRET—
Page-59
ANNEX B

SOVIET AID TO INSURGENT MOVEMENTS IN THE THIRD WORLD

This annex provides some background on the level,
scope, and motives of Soviet support of insurgencies.

The Middle East

The PLO (Palestine Liberation Organization)

1. Moscow has provided military assistance and
training to the Palestinian Liberation Organization
and some of its member groups for a number of years.
This support increased greatly following the Arab-
Israeli war in 1973 as the USSR moved to compensate
for losses sustained in its relations with Egypt and to
frustrate US-backed efforts to attain a peace settle
ment. The bulk of Soviet aid has gone to Fatah, the
largest group, which is headed by Yasir’ Arafat. The
Soviets have also given assistance to the Syrian-con-
trolled As-Saiqa, the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine (PFLP), which is headed by George
Habbash but is no longer a member of the PLO; and
to the Popular Democratic Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (PDFLP), which is a Marxist group headed
by Naif Hawatmah.

2. The quantities and value of materiel furnished by
the Soviets cannot be determined, as much of it has
been channeled through Arab clients—including, at
different times, Egypt, Syria, and Libya. The assist-
ance is substantial, however, and has included antiair-
craft missiles. In addition, the Soviets have provided
military and political training to Palestinians in the
USSR. 7

3. While the Soviets have from time to time advised
the PLO that terrorist attacks both within and outside
Israel could prove counterproductive and were there-
fore inadvisable, continued Soviet support clearly has
not been made contingent on the PLO’s abandoning
the use of terror.

The PFLO (Popular Front for the Liberation of Oman)

4, The USSR has given propaganda support, train-
ing, and arms to the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Oman since 1969. The PFLO is based in South

Yemen and, until late 1975, conducted operations in
Dhofar, Oman’s southern province. At that time the
PFLO members suffered a major military setback and
have since been confined to South Yemen, where they
are presumably regrouping and waiting for the oppor-
tunity to move again.

5. The quantity of Soviet aid provided the PFLO is
impossible to evaluate. All assistance has been fun-
neled through either South Yemen or Iraq, and, as the
aid furnished by these nations themselves is of Soviet
origin, it is hard to differentiate among the donors.
The amount of aid apparently was insignificant until
1972, when it began to increase. During 1974 and
1975 the PFLO reportedly received significant quanti-
ties of arms from the USSR, including sophisticated
antiaircraft missiles. Since the PFLO's defeat in No-
vember 1975, the Soviets reportedly have continued to
supply arms and other assistance, but probably in
limited quantities.

North Africa

The Polisorio (Western Schara)

6. The Soviets have given little, if any, direct
assistance to the Polisario, which operates in Western
Sahara and receives most of its support from Algeria.
Reports of Soviet involvement in the training of
Polisario elements have been of questionable reliabil-
ity. Though not directly involved, the Soviets have

- clearly not placed any restrictions on Algerian or

55
SEGRE

Libyan assistance to the organization. As a result, the
Polisario has become rather well equipped in the past
several years with weapons that are primarily Soviet in
This indirect type of assistance has enabled the
Soviets to maintain their credibility with both the
Polisario and Algeria, while preventing the deteriora-
tion of their relations with Morocco. It has also given
the Soviets considerable flexibility for future decision-
making. They support the right of self-determination
for Western Sahara, the position endorsed by Algeria
and the Polisario, and they have referred in positive
terms to the Polisario organization. This position pre-
Page-60
—SEGREF—

sumably gives them the option of supporting the group
more overtly in the future if they decide this is
desirable.

The Ansars (Sudan)

7. Soviet backing for the Ansar insurgents in north-
ern Sudan is even more tenuous than that for the
Polisario. The Soviets have not defended the Ansar
cause in their propaganda; they have no direct contact
with the Ansars; and they have provided no direct
support for the insurgency. They have, however,
certainly approved of Libya's supplying of Soviet
equipment to the rebels, and in addition, accord-
ing to several reports, either they or the East Euro-
peans were involved in transporting such equipment
from Libya to Ethiopia for transfer to the Ansars in
the fall of 1976. Since early 1977, Libyan support for
the Ansars has decreased for a number of reasons, one
of which has been Sudan's recent policy of reconcili-
ation with the rebels. As Libyan support for the Ansars
has fallen, the USSR’s remote involvement has further
diminished.

Frolinat (Chad Liberation Front)

8. There is no evidence of Soviet support for the
Chad Liberation Front (Frolinat). As in the case of the
Ansars, however, the rebels are equipped with weap-
ons manufactured by the Soviets which have been
supplied by Libya, and there is no indication that the
Soviets have sought. to prevent the Libyans from
transferring this material. This policy has again given
the Soviets desirable flexibility. Should the insurgency
prove successful, they can claim to have been an
important supporter; if it should fail, they have been
detached enough to prevent repercussions and to deny
responsibility. In September 1978, however, one of the
two Frolinat factions went over to the government's
side, and Libya withdrew its military personnel—
some 300 men—from both factions. Libya will con-
tinue to provide small arms and training to the
Frolinat insurgents.

Southern Africa

9. In southern Africa the USSR backed successful
insurgencies in Angola and Mozambique and contin-
ues to be the major source of foreign support for
insurgents in Rhodesia and Namibia. But, in support-
ing these insurgencies, Moscow has been careful to
follow overtly the lead of the principal black-ruled
states in the area. The USSR has, for example, not

56
—SECREF—

publicly challenged Western attempts to reach negoti-
ated settlements in Namibia and Rhodesia, even

“though the Soviets have privately advocated continued

insurgency. We believe that the Soviets would prefer
that nationalists secure power through military struy-
gles like that in Angola which would establish a weak
regime dependent on Soviet aid. If one of the insur-
gent groups gains control through peaceful means,
however, the USSR will attempt to maneuver itself
into being the dominant foreign power.

Rhodesia

10. The USSR, with Cuban assistance, provides the
Patriotic Front (PF)—the tenuous alliance of the
Zimbabwe African People’s Union (ZAPU) and the
Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU)—with a
range of assistance including weapons, training, diplo-
matic support, and money. ZAPU has received more
of this aid than ZANU, a faction of the PF that
Moscow finds ideologically less acceptable. As com-
pared with the Soviet investment in Angola and
Ethiopia, support thus far for the PF has been small,
costing the USSR less than $100 million.

11. The Soviet role in the Rhodesian situation has
been limited by the leaders of the Frontline States who
hope to see the Rhodesian problem solved without
extensive non-African involvement. To limit the Soviet
role, the Presidents of the Frontline States have in-
sisted that military equipment destined for the PF be
channeled through them. In addition, although the
number of Cuban military personnel has risen in
Mozambique, it and the other Frontline States have
restricted the number of Soviet and Cuban advisers
they allow to work with the PF; Zambia has been
particularly cautious in this regard.

12. The USSR has had to accept the restriction
placed on its activities by the Frontline States. The PF
controls no territory which could be used to support an
expanded Soviet role and is itself dependent on the
Frontline States for facilities to train its forces and
launch operations into Rhod In deference to the
Frontline Presidents, Moscow publicly endorses a unit-
ed PF, hoping that it can allay their suspicions, expand
its influence, and position itself to take advantage of
opportunities presented elsewhere in the region.

 

Namibia
13. The USSR provides political and military sup-

port for the South-West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), but the level of military assistance is less
Page-61
SECRET

extensive than that provided to the Rhodesian insur-
gents. SWAPO receives military equipment from the
USSR primarily through Angola, where its main train-
ing camps and bases are located. SWAPO guerrillas
are trained by Soviet and Cuban advisers in Africa, the
USSR, and Cuba.

14. The People’s Republic of China was the main
supplier in the early 1970s. Recently, Chinese aid to
SWAPO has declined, and the Soviet role as arms
supplier has grown dramatically. We believe, how-
ever, that: Moscow regards SWAPO as secondary to its
‘rests in Angola.and Rhodesia.

 

in

Republic of South Africa

15. There is no insurgency in South Africa, but the
Soviet Union intends to play a role in developments
there. The Soviet Union provides some support for the
African National Council (ANC).

Asia

16. Although Vietnam, the centerpiece of Soviet
policy in Indochina, continues to provide some support
to the Thai Communists, there is no evidence that the
Soviets are directly supporting any insurgency in Asia.
Moscow does, however, continue to fund local Com-
munist parties. In addition, some Soviet equipment
may pass indirectly to local insurgencies through third

57
~-SEGREE—

if not fourth parties. One, and perhaps the only,
example is Libyan support for the Muslim insurgency
in the Philippines. On the whole, however, the Soviets
have meticulously pursued a policy of state-to-state
relations with all of Asia in order to allay suspicions of
Soviet intentions and to deprive the Chinese of any
opportunities to exploit Soviet duplicity or Soviet-
fueled regional antagonisms to their own advantage.

Latin America

17. We have little information on Soviet support for
insurgent. movements in Latin America. Reliable
sources, however, have reported that Latin’ Americans
have been training in the Soviet Union since the early
1960s. Third World trainees in the USSR are selected
by the Chief Intelligence Directorate (GRU) of the
General Staff and by the Committee for State Security
(KGB) on the basis of their potential for leadership
and their attitudes toward the USSR.

18. We have some evidence that Soviet support to
Latin American insurgencies is channeled through
East European and Cuban embassies. Cuba maintains
a small training program for Latin American insur-
gents and provides refuge for Latin American Com-
munist exiles. Latin American Communist parties are
supported directly by the Soviet Communist Party and
indirectly through a variety of Communist-dominated
international organizations.
Page-62
ANNEX C

THE MOVEMENT OF LARGE SOVIET FORCES BY MILITARY TRANSPORT
AVIATION—HYPOTHETICAL DEPLOYMENTS .

1. The circumstances that would determine the C

nature and scale of any Military Transport Aviation
(VTA) airlift of large contingents of general purpose
forces to the Third World could vary so widely that
any attempt to forecast how the Soviets would employ
their military air transports for that purpose is useless.
Therefore, to illustrate Soviet airlift capabilities for
such missions to destinations at different ranges from
the USSR, we have considered three force packages: a
slightly reduced airborne division, a tactical aviation
regiment, and an air defense force comprising an SA-6
regiment, two ZSU-23-4/SA-9 batteries, and two air-
borne regiments. .

2. The deployment times which have been com-
puted include only the time required to transport the
units—from the time the first aircraft departs until the
arrival of the last aircraft at the destination. Additional
time—perhaps three to four days—would be required
to prepare the force for deployment, involving activi-
ties such as:

— Alerting airborne and transport aircraft units.

— Making or modifying plans.

— Recalling aircraft from other missions.

Performing any necessary maintenance.

— Deploying aircraft and airborne units to airfields
for loading.

— Loading the force.

Ensuring adequate support facilities and person-
nel at intermediate and destination airfields.

Arrangements for overflight clearances and refueling

en route are a major uncertainty, particularly if the

operation extends over several days. They could delay

the movement or force the Soviets to decide between

cancellation of the support operation and unauthor-
“ized overflight.

8. While there should be numerous indications of
Soviet preparations for deployment of a large force

58
— SECRET

once these have been accomplished,
deployment could begin on very short notice.

4. It should also be noted that, for the purposes of
this Estimate, the daily sortie capacity of an airfield
was determined by certain assumptions regarding the
number of available parking spaces, its air traffic
control capability, and the average turnaround time
for each aircraft. Adequate supplies of fuel were also
assumed to be available at all intermediate and desti-
nation airfields. Fuel supplies are a major factor in
large-scale operations, however, and shortages have
been experienced at some of the small Third World
airfields in both US and Soviet airlifts.

5. Figure 7 depicts the surge capability of VTA to
airlift a reduced airborne division—that is, one with
all of its heavy weapons, 90 percent of its men, 70
percent of its trucks, and enough ammunition for
three days of heavy fighting. No POL is transported
by air. The serviceability of the transport force is
assumed to be 0.85, and each aircraft makes one flight.
As shown in the tabulation, the force comprises the
approximately 500 aircraft found in five VTA divi-
sions but does not include the 150 AN-12s in the five

independent VTA regiments:
Aircraft Inventory

 

VTA Division Cub Candid Cock
Seshcha a2 4 49
Vitebsk “3 49 °
Keivoy Rog 132 0 0
Melitopol 99 0 0
Panevezys 99 8 o

6. The capability for surge delivery decreases after
2,000 nautical miles because of the range-payload
limits of the AN-12 Cub, which constitutes 80 percent
of the transport fleet. Thus, to make full use of their
lift capability in long-distance deployments, the So-
viets must be able to make stops for. refueling every
2,000 to 3,000 nm.
Page-63
—SECRET—

Surge Delivery Capability of
Soviet Military Transport Aviation
(VTA)

Without Predeployment of Aircrews

Figuce 7

Fraction of reduced airborne division

 

3
Range capability (thousand am)

4

 

ne

7. Movements to Syria, Mozambique, and Cuba
were selected as representative of possible Soviet
deployments in support of client states. Operations to
distant areas such as Mozambique and Cuba would
require several refueling stops, and the parking and
support capacities of intermediate airfields would
probably be an important limiting factor. The avail-
able parking space would become particularly signifi-
cant if the crews were not augmented or replaced and
had to remain overnight at an intermediate field.
Furthermore, this situation would greatly increase the
time required to deploy the units.

 

8. For movement to Mozambique without augmen-
tation or pre-positioning of crews, the rate of delivery
is probably limited by the number of aircraft parking
spaces and the requirement for resting crews either en
route or in Mozambique. The rates of delivery for five
possible routes from the Soviet Union to Mozambique,
ranging in distance from 4,700 nm to 7,700 nm, are
shown in the left-hand chart of figure 8. The first
deliveries require 24 to 28 hours, regardless of the

59
—SEERET

route selected. Movement of the reduced airborne
division would require at least seven days over the
most direct route through Pakistan. For routes passing
through the Middle East, there is a requirement for a
refueling and rest stop in the vicinity of Aden. The
most rapid delivery of the air defense force and a
tactical aviation regiment would require five to six
days and two to three days, respectively. If the only
route available were via Cuinea and Angola, the
delivery rate would be approximately one-third of that
achievable using the more direct routes—a constraint
due to limited airfield facilities in Guinea. While the
first delivery could occur within 48 hours, the deploy-
ment of the reduced division would require about 21
days.

  
  

 

   

9. Deployments to Mozambique could be acceler-
ated by crew augmentation or replacement, so that
no rest periods would be required. In this case,
the delivery rate would be limited primarily by
the refueling time, maintenance requirements, and
traffic-handling capability at intermediate stops.
Under these conditions, the earliest deliveries could
occur within 16 to 20 hours and movement of the
reduced airborne division could be completed in three
to four days, as shown in the right-hand chart of figure
8. Delivery of the air defense force and the tactical
aviation regiment would require two to three days and
‘one to two days, respectively.

10. Movements to Cuba were selected to represent
Soviet deployments in support of a client state in the
Western Hemisphere. Three possible routes were con-
sidered: through Iceland direct to Cuba, through
Algeria direct to Cuba, and through Guinea direct to
Cuba. Each of these routes has a final leg in excess of
4,000 nm, a distance which precludes the use of the
Cub aircraft. The movement shown in figure 9 is
based on the route through Algeria, which would
likely be used in such an operation. Approximately 30
percent of the reduced airborne division could be
delivered in 24 to 48 hours; movement of the force
could be completed in approximately 10 days. The
movement of the air defense force would require
seven to eight days. Delivery of a tactical aviation
regiment, almost all of which could be moved in one
lift by the available Candid and Cock aircraft, would
be essentially complete in two days. In the unlikely
event that a refueling point in the Atlantic (such as the
Azores) were available, deliveries comparable to those
to Mozambique would be possible.

11M
representative of deployments to a state relatively, near

 

jovements to Syria were considered as being
Page-64
Delivery Capability to Mozambique of
Soviet Military Transport Aviation

Without Predeployment of Aircrews

Fraction of reduced airborne division

Figure 8

With Augmentation or Predeployment of Aircrews

Fraction of reduced airborne division

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 j / 10 / /
0.9

Odessa-Cairo-Aden +f YP “8 /
08 0.8

Tashkent-Karachi : . [f—resthentKeraci
07 Odessa-Baghdad-Aden or 97 "

Budapest-Cairo-Aden :
06 0.6
= Budapest-Baghdad-Aden / [
0s Je Os I]
0.4 04 l
Conakry-Luanda

03 03

Uf

| Odessa-Baghdad-Aden .

 

 

 

0.2 ff . /

On pA Ot

t bot tt Ci

o 1 2 3 4 S§ 6 7 8 8 10 o 12 3 4 5 6 7 @ 8 10
Days Days

 

 

to the Soviet Union. Given the proper circumstances,
the Soviets are capable of moving air-transportable
units into such areas very rapidly. The delivery rate
would most likely be limited by the priority placed
upon the operation rather than by considerations
which were limiting in deliveries to more distant areas
such as Mozambique or Cuba. For Syria, delivery
routes might be 600 to 1,700 nm in length, depending
on available overflight clearances. Either airdropping
or airlanding of Soviet airborne units is possible for

such distances.

12. Syria has a number of airfields near major road
and rail lines which are suitable for delivery of a large
military force. Operational considerations, however,
would probably require that deliveries be concen-
trated at a particular location, such as Damascus. An
unopposed airlanding of the reduced airborne division
at three major airfields near Damascus (Damascus
International, Dumayr, and Mezze) could be accom-

60
——SEERET—

plished in one to two days given the following
conditions:

— Availability of sufficient VTA aircraft (approxi-
mately 500 to 600 flights would be required
with the current force).

— Ability to keep a large percentage of the aircraft
on schedule.

— Uninterrupted overflight clearance for the dura-
tion of the operation.

— Preemption of all other air operations at the
three airfields (two of which are major Syrian
fighter bases).

— Availability of adequate air traffic control, logis-
tics handling, and maintenance personnel.

— Continuation of operations on a 24-hour basis. .
Page-65
—SEEREF—

— Arrival or departure of an aircraft every six
minutes; average turnaround time of three hours
for each aircraft.

13. Under the above assumptions, a delivery period
of one to two days is judged to be the minimum time
to airland the unit in Syria under the most favorable

Delivery Capability to Cuba of

conditions. Should the deployment encounter those
disruptions which typically surface in large-scale mili-
tary operations, the delivery time would likely in-
crease. We therefore believe that a more realistic
deployment time for a Soviet airborne unit fréin the
USSR to Syria would be three to four days,

Figure 9

Soviet Military Transport Aviation

Without Predeployment of Aircrews

Fraction of reduced airborne division

 

10

 

él

—SEERET—
Page-66
ANNEX D

THIRD WORLD REGIONAL PERCEPTIONS OF SOVIET MILITARY POWER

A. Apprehension and Complacence

1, Most Third World leaders and their advisers
have a fair appreciation of the magnitude and capabil-
ilies of the Soviet armed forces. Because of their
mission or ‘location, however, a large part of these
forces—the strategic and tactical nuclear arsenals, the
nationwide air defenses, and the ground and air forces
arrayed against Western Europe and China—have
little direct bearing on developments in the Third
‘ World. Nevertheless, they play a significant role in the
perception of many Third World leaders who believe
that the USSR, because of its increased military
strength, is able to take bolder and more aggressive
military initiatives in support of its policies toward the
Third World than in years past.

 

2. Of special concern to Third World leaders are
Soviet willingness and readiness to employ military
means. The Soviets have demonstrated in the Middle
East, Angola, and most recently in Ethiopia an impres-
sive capability to respond to crises and to conduct
military operations over considerable distances. Al-
though these leaders are on the whole uncertain about
the full extent of Soviet military capabilities, their
recognition that the USSR has sufficient military
power to become involved in any local conflict almost
certainly makes them uneasy.

3. Third World leaders mostly relate to the USSR as
a source of weapons and military advisers. In this
regard Moscow represents its arms sales—and the
Third World generally accepts them—not as military
operations but 4s essentially commercial-political
transactions.

 

4. Attitudes in the Third World toward Soviet
military projection and presence, as is to be expected,
are conflicting as they reflect age-old regional rivalries
spurred by new national aspirations and self-interests.
In the areas where regional conflicts are most intense
and where Soviet projection of military power could
decisively influence the outcomes, these attitudes—
discussed briefly below—can play an important role,
though to what extent Soviet policy in the Third
World takes these attitudes into account is not known.

62
— SECRET

Middle East .

5. The nations of the Middle East are generally
uncomfortable with Soviet military presence in this
region. The conservative states (principally Saudi Ara-
bia, Oman, and Iran) are the most apprehensive of
Soviet military capabilities. In their view, the ultimate
Soviet objective in the Middle East is to gain control of
the Red Sea and eventually the oil-rich Arab Peninsula
by establishing hegemony in northeast Africa, includ-
ing the Horn. They have long believed that the Soviets -
would attempt to project power in the Middle East,
but primarily through clandestine support of insurgen-
cies and national liberation movements, which they
see as the greater current threat. The recent events in
the Horn, however, appear to have convinced the
conservatives that Moscow is now ready and willing to
move in an overt manner as well. To a large extent
Egyptian leaders share these perceptions.

 

 

6. Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean Sea and
the Indian Ocean are regarded as the only projection
of Soviet military power that currently threatens the
Middle East, although Iran certainly is aware of its
vulnerability to a Soviet overland invasion and sees
Soviet weaponry in Iraq and Afghanistan as a threat
by proxy.

7. Though the current socialist regimes in Syria and
Iraq lean politically toward thé Soviet Union, which
furnishes the bulk of their weaponry, they remain
independent and fearful of being labeled as Soviet
satellites. Syrian attitudes toward Soviet military pres-
ence there are somewhat contradictory. The Syrians
welcome a Soviet balance to US support of Israel and
would like a Soviet promise to intervene directly if
Syria were threatened by an Israeli attack. Yet-Damas-
cus has always been wary of Soviet intentions and has
tried to minimize Soviet military presence in Syria
during periods of peace.

8. Syria’s intervention in Lebanon in 1976 and its
attempts to control the leftists and Palestinians an-
gered Soviet leaders and resulted in a slowdown of
Page-67
SEER

Soviet arms deliveries for eight months. The maneuver
had little effect. Even though Syria i heavily depend-
ent on the Soviets for arms, it maintained and even
strengthened its forces in Lebanon and has given no
sign of withdrawing. Since then, however, the focus of
Syrian opposition in Lebanon has become the Chris-
tian militias, a more acceptable target from the Soviet
point of view. In addition, Sadat’s peace initiative
toward Israel has brought the Soviets and Syrians
closer together, and they have signed an arms agree-
ment valued at an estimated $1 billion. Syria's Presi-
dent Assad remains distrustful of the Soviets, however,
and has steadfastly refused to sign a friendship treaty
with the USSR. .

 

Horn of Africa

9. Attitudes in the Horn differ markedly. The
Ethiopian regime looks favorably on Soviet military
support, at least in the short term, as the mainstay of
its fight against guerrillas in Eritrea and the Ogaden.
Somalia and Sudan view Soviet’ presence as a direct
threat to their security and sovereignty. In Djibouti,
President Gouled and most-of his fellow, Issas share this
concern, but the Afars are for the most part willing to
accept Ethiopian, Cuban, and Soviet support to pre-
vent their ethnic group from being dominated by the
Somali-backed Issas. Kenya professes serious alarm at
the increased Soviet influence in eastern Africa and
holds the USSR responsible for arming Somalia and
Uganda and strengthening the threat to Kenya from
both those directions. Kenya's closest ally in Africa
remains Soviet-backed Ethiopia, an alliance based on
common distrust of Somalia.

 

10. The Ethiopians are grateful for, and impressed
by, the massive military assistance they have received
from the Soviet Union. Although the Ethiopian revolu-
tionary government had its own ideological motives
for siding with the Soviets, Moscow's offer to build the
nation into a strong regional military power and help
repulse the Somali invasion assured the Soviets of a
strong position in Ethiopia. Nevertheless, while Ethio-
pian leaders in the near term see no alternative to a
close military and political relationship with Moscow,
they perceive that their interests and those of the
Soviets will not always coincide. Meanwhile, the need
for Soviet. arms to confront Eritrean and Somali
guerrillas and Ethiopia's historical concern about
“Arab encirclement”—heightened now by the percep-
tion that it is surrounded by reactionary Arab states
allied with the United States—favor continued close
Ethiopian-Soviet military ties.

63
—SEERET—

IL. As a result of Soviet assistance to Ethiopia, the
Somalis moved from seemingly slavish adherence to
the Soviet line in 1977 to the forefront of nations
decrying the menace of Moscow’s “grand design” for
Africa which the Somalis believe includes the subjuga-
tion of Somalia and Djibouti. To some extent Somali
fears of Soviet intentions are opportunistic—an_at-
tempt to gain political and material support from
regional and Western powers. Clearly, Somalia's im-
mediate concern is its drive to wrest ethnic Somalis
{rom Ethiopian control. Nevertheless, Mogadishu is
xenuinely apprehensive about Soviet maves in the
Horn and their long-term implications and believes
that military power is.crucial to the achievement of
Soviet objectives. The Somalis believe, moreover, that
Moscow will try to pressure them into making substan-
tial accommodations, to use subversion to undermine
the Siad regime, and even to support an Ethiopian
invasion.

12. Sudan too is apprehensive of Soviet capabilities
to project military power, but this is not a new stance
prompted by the shift in Moscow's alliance from
Somalia to Ethiopia. Sudanese officials for the past two
years have warned the United States about Soviet
intentions and have been outspoken both in public and
private in describing what they believe to be the main
Soviet threat to this area—namely, an attack against
Sudan by Libya. They perceive that in the long run
Moscow seeks to be the dominant foreign influence in
the Horn and the Red Sea.

The Frontline States

13. In southern Africa, the three Frontline States
that are most directly involved in the. Rhodesian
problem—Zambia, Tanzania, and Mozambique—
generally view Soviet military assistance for the liber-
ation.of Rhodesia as a necessary evil, having failed to
persuade the West to provide military aid and observ-
ing that such help has not been forthcoming from
China. The Frontline Presidents are suspicious of
Soviet motives and wary of the entree that military
assistance furnishes for Soviet penetration and subver-
sion of their governments. They are cognizant of the
depth of Soviet involvement and influence in Angolan
affairs as a direct result of Moscow's military support
of the Neto regime and determined to avoid a repeti-
tion of that process in their countries. They have
consistently tried to confine the Soviet role to provid-
ing.arms and military advisers for their regular forces.
The Zambians and Mozambicans also have reluctantly
Page-68
~ SEGRET—

permitted a few Soviet advisers to work with the
Zimbabwe (black Rhodesian) insurgents on their terri-
tories. The Presidents view the Cubans as less of a
threat than the Soviets, and are somewhat more
willing to have Cuban military personnel training and
advising nationalist. groups. Nevertheless, President
Kaunda, who hosted around 100 Cuban advisers as of
the fall of 1978, has wanted to limit Cuban presence,
though that may be difficult.

Southeast Asia

14. Southeast Asian governments do not perceive a
direct military threat to their countries from the Soviet
Union, though they frequently call attention to Soviet
military power as a way of encouraging the United
States to maintain its stabilizing military presence in
this region. The’ nations of Southeast Asia are pro-
foundly suspicious of and basically hostile toward the
USSR and view Soviet activities mostly in the frame-
work of the Sino-Soviet rivalry in which-Moscow seeks
to counter every Chinese move and statement, thus
creating needless problems in Southeast Asian relations
with China, In this regard they fear that Soviet
support of Vietnam in its disputes with China will
complicate these relations and ultimately goad Hanoi
to adopt a more aggressive policy in the region. They
are particularly concerned that the Vietnamese will
serve as Moscow's surrogates to expand Soviet
influence.

Latin America

15. Concern among Latin American countries
about Soviet conventional military prowess is much
greater than the threat the USSR’s current capabilities
Dose to this region. The views of many of these
countries are affected by their own internal security
problems, their traditional distrust of Communist and
Marxist ideology encouraging revolution, and the per-
ception that Soviet naval deployments threaten their
lines of .communication. This last concern is most
prevalent in the more southern Latin American
countries.

B. Regional Military Balance

16. The degree to which Soviet military assistance
to Third World countries affects regional balances of
forces is dependent on a variety of factors, chief of
“which is whether the opposing side has sources of
military aid adequate to offset the strengthening of the
Soviet client's military capabilities. For example, al-

  

64
~ SECRET

though the USSR has provided massive aid to the Arab

side in the Middle East, Israel has more than compen-

sated by obtaining large quantilics of sophisticated

arms from the United States. In the Ethiopian-Somali

confrontation, however, Somalia was unable ‘to obtain~
sufficient aid from Arab or Western sources to offset

Savict support of Ethiopia.

17. In this regard, the USSR’s ability to provide
large quantities of arms in a relatively short time is a
major advantage. The West, because of its more
complex decisionmaking processes and its limited
tilable for immediate

  

stocks of weapons i
often needs long leadtimes to provide arms
quantities.

 

18. Another key determinant of the impact of
Soviet aid on a regional balance of forces is the
inherent military potential of the recipient relative to
other regional states. India, for example, has the
largest and best equipped armed forces in South Asia.
With the exception’ of China, no other country in that
region—regardless of outside aid—has the population,
economic resources, and defense industry to match
India's potential. Soviet military assistance to any of
these nations, including India, would not affect this
basic disparity, although India would look with dis-
favor on any military aid to its neighbors.

19. A final consideration is the level of military
technology which the Soviets are willing to provide.
Whereas they have readily introduced certain ad-
vanced weapon systems into parts of the Third World,
they have withheld these same systems from other
parts primarily, we believe, because of the likely effect
on the regional military balance. A case in point is
North Korea, where the Soviets up to now have
refrained from introducing advanced -weapons—such
as MIG-23 and SU-20 fighters and SA-6 surface-to-air
missiles—which they have exported elsewhere.

20. Clearly, it is in Moscow's interest in some
instances to limit arms shipments in order to maintain
at least a rough parity in itary forces in regions
where the opposing side has prompt, open-ended
access to foreign sources of advanced military equip-
ment and where the United States is deeply commit-
ted to that side’s defense. This is basically the case in
Korea and the Middle East. In areas such as Angola
and Ethiopia, however, where these conditions do not
obtain, Moscow has made a concerted effort to pro-
vide its clients with the military assistance required to
gain military superiority in the region.
Page-69
Aretic Ocean

  

North
Pacitie
Ocean

Indian Ocean

Avsteatie
Page-70
4

 

5

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the National Foreign Assessment Center. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his or her jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the following
officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of Defense
and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Stoff
¢. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, for the Department of the Army
d. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
¢. Assistant Chief of ‘Staff, latelligence, for the Department of the Air Force
f. Deputy Assistant Administrator. for National Security, for the Department of Energy
g- Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
i. Special Assistant to the Secretory for National Security, for the Department of the
Treasury
j. The Deputy Director for National Foreign Assessment for any other Department or
Agency
2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable
security regulations, or returned to the National Foreign Assessment Center.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it for a
period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document should be destroyed
or returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be requested of the forwarding
agency to retain it in accordance with [AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4—the-title-ot this: Ae d- Lyfe he—tont-—should-be—clessified:

“CONMDENTHAt

paratery
Page-71
=—Seerete=