
Page-1
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED

Soviet Strategic Policies and Force Options
Under the Vladivostok Understanding

Fep-Seeret

FEE-B8PO6B-LS-
3 March 1975

copy N° 217
Page-2
aa

_
Page-3
SOVIET STRATEGIC POLICIES AND FORCE
OPTIONS UNDER THE VLADIVOSTOK
UNDERSTANDING
Page-4
—Fop-Beerot
CONTENTS

Page
PREFACE ...... 02-0 e cece cee eee cette tee sees e estes eres esters sess sess 1
KEY JUDGMENTS .........- 2
Soviet Strategic Outlook .........-.--5-25seeeeeeer eter ernest 2
Soviet Planning Issues .......... 222+ -+ 20000 0err tere retsrtsseee 3
Projections of Soviet Forces ......-.---+++-20+5e02 50st ert s
Force A (Best Estimate) .......--- +2225 +50000000+ : 4
Force B (Primary Emphasis on Fixed ICBMs) ...----- 4
Force C (Emphasis on Mobility) .. -..--.--+--+---++ 5
Implications for the Strategic Environment .......------+-+++00-000 0" 5
DISCUSSION . 7
[ GENERAL «oo oo. ccccccceeecececccseeeeencreessettresetesseenss 1
Il. VLADIVOSTOK AND NEAR-TERM SOVIET POLICY .....-....---- 8
III, VLADIVOSTOK IN A BROADER CONTEXT ......---.0-- 225-020 10
A. Questions of Technological Uncertainty ....-..----++-+++ weeeee 10
B. The General Correlation of Forces .......-+++++- 5-75 500+ v.10

IV. SOVIET FORCES UNDER SALT TWO .........-20.000200202000-++ 10

A. The New Strategic Arms Environment ........-----+---5.00s50 10
Page-5
Page
B. Factors Affecting Force Composition ...................-.0...... MW
Delivery Vehicle Limit ..............
MIRV Limit ......02........

Weapon System Vulnerability .. .
Age of Weapon Systems .....
System Effectiveness and Flexibility .
Recent Investment Decisions ...............

 

  

C. Force Projections ............
Force A: The Best Estimate :
Force B: Primary Emphasis on Fixed ICBMs ..... .
Force C: Emphasis on Mobility ..... 2.00.20... o.oo e cece eee 18

 
 

D. Quantitative Measures of Offensive Forces ....................... 18
E. Implications for the Strategic Environment ....................... 18
APPENDIX: COLLATERAL CONSTRAINTS .......................... 37
Page-6
SOVIET STRATEGIC POLICIES AND FORCE
OPTIONS UNDER THE VLADIVOSTOK
, UNDERSTANDING

PREFACE

NIE 11-3/8-74, Soviet Forces for Intercontinental Conflict
Through 1985, dated 14 November 1974, was issued just before the
Summit Meeting at Vladivostok. This Interagency Intelligence Report
for recipients of that NIE reexamines Soviet policies and force options
in light of the Vladivostok understanding. It contains judgments about
Soviet policies and force options based on the provisions of the US-
USSR accord at Vladivostok. The Soviets’ motives for entering into
that accord and their interpretation of its provisions, as may be re-
vealed at the SALT TWO negotiations, may alter some of our under-
standings and assumptions. The judgments and force projections in
this report should be regarded, therefore, as tentative and as supple-
menting rather than superseding relevant parts of NIE 11-3/8-74.

This Interagency Intelligence Report was prepared by the Central
Intelligence Agency with the collaboration of the Defense Intelligence
Agency, the National Security Agency, the Energy Research and De-
velopment Administration, and the intelligence organizations of the
Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force.
Page-7
KEY JUDGMENTS

We reaffirm our previous estimate that the Soviets will continue
a vigorous strategic arms competition with the US and, within the
limits agreed to at Vladivostok, will further shift the emphasis to quali-
tative force improvements. Under ceilings of 2,400 total delivery ve-
hicles and 1,320 MIRVed missiles, the following key judgments of
NIE 11-3/8-74 still hold:

—The basis for mutual deterrence should continue to exist for
the next ten years.

— Soviet strategic offensive forces will have enhanced capabilities
for both deterrence and war fighting through extensive mod-
ernization, with substantial improvements in numbers of weap-
ons, counterforce capability, flexibility, and survivability.

— Soviet strategic offensive forces will continue to be superior to
those of the US in some characteristics, notably missile throw
weight and total megatonnage, but inferior in other respects—
in number of bombers, in total number of nuclear weapons, and
in system accuracies and other qualitative features.

Soviet Strategic Outlook

In NIE 11-3/8-74, before the Vladivostok Summit, we concluded
that Moscow is pursuing a strategic policy which is simultaneously
prudent and opportunistic, aimed at assuring no less than the continued
maintenance of comprehensive equality with the US, while at the same
time seeking to attain some degree of strategic advantage if US be-
havior permits. The Vladivostok accord has shown that, in a situation
in which numbers of US delivery vehicles and MIRVed missiles are
limited, the Soviets believe a rough equality of strategic forces will
satisfy at least their minimum security requirements over the next ten
years. (We still differ over the nature and goals of Soviet strategic
policy, and those differences have not been changed by Vladivostok. )
Specifically, the Vladivostok accord reflects an outlook on the strategic
arms competition in which the Soviets believe:

— Quantitative competition in numbers of delivery vehicles does
not offer them greater advantages in the strategic balance dur-
ing the next decade.
Page-8
Fop-eeret

—The USSR could at least maintain and possibly improve its
relative position in the qualitative competition with the US in
a situation in which an agreement limited US numbers.

— The ceilings imposed on the US would reduce some of the So-
viets’ own uncertainties about the future and would make it
easier for them to handle the significant uncertainties which
remain.

— Vigorous research and development in technologically ad-
vanced weapon concepts offer a better prospect in the long
run for the Soviets to alter the strategic environment in their
favor than continued competition in current types of weapons.

Soviet Planning Issues

The prospects for limitations on strategic forces have almost cer-
tainly prompted the Soviets to reexamine plans for their strategic
attack forces. They must decide which weapons are to be dismantled
or destroyed in order to comply with the limit of 2,400 delivery ve-
hicles. They must also consider the rates of deployment for, and the
allocation of MIRVed missile launchers between, ICBMs and SLBMs.
They have probably already decided on the character of their strategic
offensive force modernization program through the late 1970s, but for
the period beyond, their choices as to the mix and character of weapons
to be deployed will involve the following issues:

—In light of anticipated changes in US forces, what the mix
should be among the various fixed and mobile systems to
achieve desired hard-target and counterforce capabilities and
force survivability.

— Choices among research and development options and levels
of effort.

— Advantages and disadvantages of reductions from the Vladivo-
stok levels and the forces to be reduced.

Projections of Soviet Forces

There is little evidence to suggest how the Soviets will resolve
these issues or how they intend to mix their forces in the 1980s. We
have made three basic projections of forces for intercontinental attack
illustrating options available to the Soviets under the Vladivostok ceil-
ings.
Page-9
Force A (Best Estimate). We believe that the Soviets will take a
balanced approach requiring only minimal changes in ongoing pro-
rams to upgrade their forces and that they will continue to stress
MIRVed ICBMs and emphasize qualitative improvements. This force
would incorporate a mix of ICBMs, SLBMs, and bombers which would
accommodate bureaucratic interests while striking a balance between
improved countersilo capability and overall force survivability. In this
option the Soviets:

— Dismantle silo-based launchers at some SS-11 complexes and
retire some bombers in order to comply with the 2,400 ceiling
on delivery vehicles, while deploying a land-mobile ICBM.

— Continue to emphasize better war-fighting capabilities by allo-
cating most MIRVed missile launchers to the Strategic Rocket
Forces.

— Achieve the level of technology in missile characteristics fore-
cast in the best estimate in NIE 11-3/8-74.

— Stay within the limit of 1,320 MIRVed missile launchers largely
y deploying fewer MIRVed systems across the board than
projected in the NIE 11-3/8-74 best estimate.'

— Maintain rates of deployment through the 1970s consistent with
those in the NIE 11-3/8-74 best estimate. After 1979, the pace
of deployment of MIRVed ICBMs slows somewhat to await
the availability of improved systems in about 1983.

— Achieve the level of 1,320 MIRVed missile launchers two or
three years later than forecast in the NIE 11-3/8-74 best esti-
mate.

— Maintain about 100 Bear heavy bombers by extending the life
of current systems. (If Backfires were counted under the 2,400
ceiling, both Bears and Bisons would be phased out as the Back-
fire inventory increased. )

Force B (Primary Emphasis on Fixed ICBMs). Force B assumes
the Soviets place additional emphasis on fixed ICBMs and MIRV only
The Defense Intelligence Agency, the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Depart-

ment of the Army, and the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy, believe
the Soviets will place more emphasis on survivability and stay within the 1,920 total by de-

ploying fewer MIRVed ICBMs than in the NIE 11-3/8-74 best estimate but about the same
number of MIRVed SLBMs, The consequence of this is that the limit is approached more
rapidly.
Page-10
these systems. They elect to have large numbers of accurate, high-
yield missile warheads. They accelerate the acquisition of MIRVs and
other qualitative improvements in silo-based missiles. In this option
the Soviets:

— Give even greater priority to the Strategic Rocket Forces, re-
ducing slightly the number of SLBMs* and bombers to stay
within the limit of 2,400 delivery vehicles.

— Convert nearly all their modern large ICBM launchers and all
the SS-11 launchers for MIRVed systems.

— Begin replacement of SS-X-17s, SS-18s, and SS-19s earlier and
more rapidly with follow-on missiles having slightly better ac-
curacies than in Force A.

— Deploy new, unMIRVed SLBMs, instead of MIRVed SLBMs.

— Maintain about 100 existing heavy bombers.

Force C (Emphasis on Mobility). In this option the Soviets elect
to ernphasize MIRVed mobile ICBMs and SLBMs in order to offset
the vulnerability of their silo-based ICBMs to attack by improved US
forces. In this option the Soviets:

— Reduce the number of fixed-base ICBMs to stay within the
limit of 2,400 delivery vehicles while increasing the number of
mobile ICBMs and SLBMs.

— Achieve the level of technology in missile characteristics and
the rates of deployment forecast in the NIE 11-3/8-74 best es-
timate.

— Allocate an increasing percentage of their missile launchers
for mobile systems, but maintain a significant hard-target ca-
pability with MIRVed SS-18s and SS-19s.

— Deploy a new heavy bomber and a new SSBN.

Implications for the Strategic Environment
In general, the forces we project differ more in underlying motives
than in demonstrable strategic effect. In terms of effect, what is alike
about these forces is more important than what is different about them:
— They are large, diverse, and relatively flexible, and they rep-
resent major technological achievements.

+See footnote 4 (at paragraph 45) for comment of the Director of Naval Intelligence,
Department of the Navy.
Page-11
— They have significant countersilo capabilities, Force B some-
what earlier than the other two.

— They are survivable enough to maintain far more weapons than
necessary for assured retaliatory capability.

These common characteristics also applied to the force projections in
NIE 11-3/8-74—which, however, varied a good deal more widely than
those in this report. As we have said in the past, given the character of
strategic offensive forces and a situation of rough strategic equality,
the most significant variables and uncertainties in the strategic balance
have to do with technological qualities, operating practices, and em-
ployment plans. The understanding at Vladivostok only strengthens
this conclusion.

Our estimate of the principal features of the strategic environment
during the next decade has been changed very little by the Vladivostok
accord. The USSR’s acceptance of equal ceilings on numbers of de-
livery vehicles and MIRVed missiles reinforces our confidence, how-
ever, that its leadership does not foresee dramatic advantages accruing
to either side from a competition in these measures of offensive forces—
that is, delivery vehicles and MIRVed launchers. The Soviets are likely
to remain convinced that in the strategic arms competition with the
US they must search for better—and quite possibly different—strategic
arms in the decade of SALT TWO and beyond. The Soviets will, ac-
cordingly, pursue a vigorous research and development program. But
we do not foresee technological advances in strategic forces which --
would sharply alter the balance in the USSR’s favor during the next

ten years.
Page-12
DISCUSSION

1. GENERAL

1. NIE 11-3/8-74, Soviet Forces for Intercon-.

tinental Conflict Through 1985, 14 November 1974,
depicted a Soviet Union vigorously competing in the
strategic arena against the prospect of US force
improvements and for the possibility of achieving
advantages for the USSR. The Estimate projected
alternative future Soviet strategic offensive forces
that by 1985 could range from around 2,400 to

about 3,300 delivery vehicles, and from around .

1,500 to about 3,000 MIRVed missile launchers.
The best estimate Force postulated about 2,600
delivery vehicles and more than 1,800 MIRVed
missile launchers in 1985.

2. On 24 November 1974, shortly after this
Estimate was issued, the US and the USSR agreed
at the Vladivostok Summit to seek a SALT TWO
agreement in 1975 that would limit each side over
the next ten years to 2,400 intercontinental delivery
vehicles and 1,320 MIRVed missile launchers. At
Vladivostok, the USSR dropped its insistence on
unequal aggregates of total delivery vehicles to
compensate it for US forward-based systems (FBS)
and third-country nuclear forces. In this report
we review the judgments in NIE 11-3/8-74 on
Soviet strategic policy, and provide alternative
Soviet force projections under the proposed SALT
TWO limits.

3. The events of Vladivostok and since have not
caused us to change our views of Soviet strategic
objectives or our estimates of general Soviet stra-
tegic capabilities as set forth in NIE 11-3/8-74.
Specifically, the following judgments still hold:

— The USSR expects, and will be active in, a
vigorous strategic arms competition, with
emphasis on qualitative force improve-
ments.

—Soviet strategic doctrine will put a high
premium on war-fighting capabilities as the
best deterrent and on counterforce opera-
tions as the best way to employ Soviet
forces should deterrence fail. Consequently,
the Soviets will continue to be concerned
about force survivability and about capa-
bilities to execute preemptive strikes.

— An extensive modemization of Soviet stra-
tegic offensive forces for intercontinental
conflict will provide substantial improve-
ments in counterforce capability, flexibility,
and survivability by 1980.

— Soviet forces will continue to be superior
to those of the US in some characteristics,
notably missile throw weight and total
megatonnage. They are likely to remain
inferior, however, in total numbers of de-
Page-13
ployed strategic nuclear weapons, bombers
and bomber armaments, system accuracy,
and other qualitative aspects of force pos.
ture.

-— Soviet strategic force improvement programs
over the next ten years are intended to
provide no less than continued maintenance
of comprehensive equality with the US,
while at the same time seeking to obtain
a margin of strategic advantage should US
behavior permit. (We still differ over the
nature and goals of Soviet strategic policy,
and those differences have not been changed
by Vladivostok. )

—The Soviets will have the potential for
posing a major threat to the survivability
of US silo-based missiles in the early 1980s,
provided they achieve the accuracies we
project in their follow-on ICBMs. If the US
acquires improved hard-target kill capa-
bilities (currently programed for its ICBMs
in the latest US Department of Defense
Five-Year Defense Program), the Soviets
would face threats to the survivability of

the majority of their ICBMs in the early |

1980s.

— The Soviets will not be able to launch an
attack on US strategic forces of such size
and precision as to prevent massive damage
to the Soviet Union from US retaliation.

4. We have no further insight into the Soviets’
views of selective or limited nuclear options, al-
though they have continued to express concern over
US policy with respect to selected uses of nu-
clear weapons.

5. With the Vladivostok accord, the Soviets have
accepted equal ceilings which would foreclose
their opportunities to attain clear-cut advantages
over the US in the next ten years in terms of
total and MIRVed delivery vehicles. This sig-
nifies a belief on their part that rough equality in
strategic forces over the next ten years will satisfy
at least their minimum security requirements.

6. The Vladivostok accord thus reflects an out-
look on the strategic arms competition in which the
Soviets:

—believe that quantitative competition in
numbers of delivery vehicles does not offer
them greater advantages in the strategic
balance during the next decade.

— believe that they can at least maintain, and
possibly improve, their relative posture in
the qualitative competition with the US
in a situation in which an agreement limited
US numbers.

—have concluded that the ceilings imposed
on the US would reduce some of their own
uncertainties about the future and make it
easier for them to handle the significant
uncertainties which remain.

—believe that the strategic equilibrium im-
plied by the Vladivostok limits will endure
at least ten years before technologically
advanced weapon concepts could bring
about major changes in the strategic environ-
ment.

ll. VLADIVOSTOK AND NEAR-TERM SOVIET
POLICY

7. The Soviets clearly perceived the Vladivostok
accord as an important political act. It required
a political decision by them to give up some of
their previous negotiating positions for the sake
of assuring timely agreement on issues of central
importance. From May 1972, when’ the Interim
Agreement was signed, until midsummer 1974
there were indications that their policy was to
wait several years to establish the main parameters
of a SALT TWO agreement. Their preference
appeared to be an extension of the five-year
Interim Agreement, with the USSR receiving some
numerical compensation for US forward-based sys-
tems and third-country nuclear forces.

8. The Soviets may have expected that by late
1976 or carly 1977 the impending expiration of
the Interim Agreement and the progress of their
new deployment programs would provide a pro-
Page-14
pitious negotiating environment, notwithstanding
uncertainties about US electoral politics. In any
case, until last year there were no signs in the
Soviet decision-making establishment that reaching
a new SALT agreement was a matter of great
urgency.

9. However, the resignation of President Nixon
in August, the perceived need to start off relations
with President Ford on a positive note, and the
increasingly vocal criticism of detente in the US
all may have worked to change this Soviet calcu-
lation. The Soviets came to believe that tangible
early progress in SALT was vital to the health of
their detente policy. Further, they probably rea-
soned that ensuring some limits in the strategic
weapon competition was important to their plans
in other sectors of internal and foreign affairs
during the next decade.

10. Soviet military reasons for accepting the
Vladivostok ceilings were that these ceilings:
—would not limit established Soviet force
improvement programs through about 1978-
1979—that is, the current deployment of
MIRVed fourth-generation ICBMs and ex-

pansion and improvement of the SSBN/ .

SLBM force.

—would prevent a decision by the US to
MIRV all of its ICBMs while retaining
present levels of MIRVed SLBMs. The
Soviets probably anticipated such a deci-
sion in the event that progress in SALT
was not achieved.

Il. We can only speculate on the reasons why
the Soviets retreated from their position on FBS,
third-country forces, and the need for unequal
aggregates. Although the Soviet position on FBS
was always, in part, a political bargaining ploy,
it also had genuine strategic importance. Perhaps
Brezhnev was willing to back away from earlier
Soviet positions because of the need for a simple
agreement soon, because he recognized that FBS
would represent the least important military con-
sideration affected, and because the negotiations on
mutual and balanced force reductions (MBFR)—

as well as future negotiations on strategic force
reductions—could offer opportunities in which to
address the FBS issue.

12. Another factor may have been that quali-
tative improvement in Soviet peripheral attack
capabilities—deployment of the Backfire bomber
and, later, the $S-X-20 IRBM—could dampen the
strategic rationale for and diplomatic persuasive-
ness of the Soviet position on FBS in SALT. Further,
the longer range Soviet SLBMs probably reduce
concer in the USSR about geographic asym-
metries in SSBN basing, an element in Moscow’s
former FBS position.

13. The Vladivostok accord expresses a Soviet
desire to strive for a SALT TWO agreement during
1975. But a number of uncertainties could affect
the prospects of actually achieving such a treaty:

~— Negotiations over the counting rules and
special measures to enhance verification of
a treaty incorporating the Vladivostok limits
are likely to be complex and difficult. The
Soviets are likely to resist verification-
related terms that intrude on their force-
posture decisions.

——Brezhnev’s ill health has raised concern
about the political future of the Soviet
figure most interested personally in a treaty
for signature at a 1975 Summit, and about
the short-term ability of the Soviet leader-
ship to resolve difficult policy issues.

— Events beyond the control of either side
in the Middle East could precipitate a con-
frontation that could in turn affect SALT
and Summit plans.

— We are uncertain as to the meaning of
Soviet strategic concealment and deception
activities, or how the Soviet leaders regard
them. Further analysis and information from
negotiations should help clarify these ac-
tivities.

The Soviets are surely mindful of these problems,
but they probably now expect that some kind of
treaty based on Vladivostok can be negotiated
in 1975.
Page-15
14. In the present negotiations, the Soviets prob-
ably would not accept a reduction from the ceilings
established at Vladivostok. However, they do ap-
preciate that, if a SALT TWO agreement is
reached, the US will press for early negotiation on
future strategic force reductions. Although the
Soviet position on possible force reductions has
been generally positive, we doubt that the Soviet
leadership has made any firm decisions on this
issue.

lll. VLADIVOSTOK IN A BROADER CONTEXT

A. Questions of Technological Uncertainty

15. If adopted in an agreement, the Vladivostok
ceilings will reduce uncertainties about the size
of strategic forces on both sides for the next ten
years. But uncertainties about force mix, character-
istics, and effectiveness will remain; and increased
emphasis on qualitative competition may add some-
what to those uncertainties. We believe that, re-
stricted in the pursuit of more strategic armaments
of the types limited at Vladivostok, the Soviets are
likely to remain convinced of the need for better—
and quite possibly different—strategic arms in the
decade of SALT TWO and beyond.

16. In the longer run, the Soviets probably doubt
that strategic equilibrium based on the standoff of
diversified offensive capabilities can persist indef-
initely. The dynamics of technology and a dialecti-
cal view of history probably persuade the Soviets
that the present strategic environment is transitory.
They will continue to assign a high priority to
scientific research and to programs intended to
preclude US advantages and, if possible, to alter
the strategic environment in favor of the USSR
through technologically advanced or novel strategic
weapons and systems.

17. Because this area is largely uncharted, neither
side can be sure what set of technologies might be
the source of major change, or even which of them
may be made to work. Although new offensive
technologies and force basing modes are possible,
the present strategic environment is already char-

 

acterized by offense dominance. Should substantial
change occur in the strategic environment, it would
almost certainly have to result from technology in
strategic defense. The Soviets have active R&D
programs in potentially significant areas of lasers
and nonacoustic ASW and also may have a program
in charged particle beams.

8. The General Correlation of Forces

18. The Soviets continue to see the strategic
military balance and competition as key aspects
of the global “correlation of forces.” They see a
SALT TWO agreement as making a significant
contribution to detente by helping to inhibit US
strategic programs.

19. The Soviets probably expect major changes
in their favor to occur in this global correlation
because of current economic troubles within and
among the Wester states, the political conse-
quences of these troubles, and the resulting shifts
in regional power balances. Although they may be
fearful that such changes in economic, political,
and regional terms may create dangerous moments
for the USSR, their ideology makes them optimistic
that they can profit from the changes. In the Soviet
view, a gross strategic equilibrium with the US
over the next decade probably will provide a
background against which more dynamic factors
of economic and political turmoil and of regional
military power can operate to Soviet advantage.

IV. SOVIET FORCES UNDER SALT TWO

A. The New Strategic Arms Environment

20. The Soviets almost certainly are reexamining
the composition and capabilities of their strategic
attack forces in light of the limitations expected
to be imposed through 1985 and the likelihood
of additional agreements in the future. Although
they will probably try to exempt certain weapon
systems from inclusion in the aggregate limit,
they would have to dismantle or destroy some
weapons by October 1977 in order to comply with
the aggregate limit of 2,400 strategic delivery
Page-16
vehicles.3 The limit of 1,320 MIRVed ICBMs and
SLBMs need not have an immediate effect on
their plans because the Soviets have deployed only
a few ballistic missiles with these warheads to
date, but at some point they will have to decide
how to allocate MIRVs between their ICBMs and
SLBMs.

21. Other weapon systems which might be
covered in a SALT TWO agreement are long-range
cruise missiles launched from land, air, or sea plat-
forms, and ballistic missiles Iaunched from sur-
face ships or from the seabed within territorial
waters. These systems, however, are not considered
in this report. If such weapons were developed by
the Soviets, they probably could not be deployed
in strategically significant numbers in the near
term,

22. If long-range cruise missiles were limited
by agreement, the Soviets probably would not
develop them. If they were unconstrained, how-
ever, the Soviets would be more likely to under-
take a development program, particularly if the US
continues to show interest in air- and submarine-
launched long-range cruise missiles. The develop-
ment of any long-range cruise missiles, if not

constrained by agreement, would thus present new

channels for arms competition.

23. The Soviets have indicated no interest in
the past in ballistic missiles on surface ships or in
seabed-based missiles. We do not project Soviet
development of these systems.

24. There is little evidence to suggest where
reductions will occur or how the Soviets intend
to mix their forces to ‘meet the Vladivostok-pro-

"The aggregate ceiling of 2,400 delivery vehicles would
include heavy bombers, SLBM launchers, land-based ICBM.
launchers, and bomber-launched air-to-surface missiles with
a range of more than 600 kilometers. Within this ceiling,
each side would be allowed to alter the composition of its
strategic force with two exceptions. First, neither side would
be permitted to construct new fixed ICBM launchers.
Second, neither would be permitted to convert launchers
for light ICBMs or ICBMs deployed prior to 1964 into
launchers for heavy ICBMs deployed after that time. The
Vladivostok accord stated that the weapon ceiling would
run from October 1977 through 31 December 1985.

posed limits. The projections in this paper are
intended to suggest options now available to the
Soviets, under alternative assumptions about their
decisions. The projections, including the best esti-
mate, will be subject to change as the SALT TWO
negotiations give us new insights about Soviet
force planning.

B. Factors Affecting Force Composition

25. The Soviets have already decided on the
direction of their force modernization programs
through the 1970s, but important choices remain
to be made. In the near term, they must decide how
to comply with the ceiling of 2,400 delivery vehi-
cles by October 1977. For the longer term, Soviet
choices will concern the force mix and character-
istics of weapons to be produced and deployed:

— How are the allowed 1,320 MIRVed missile
launchers to be allocated between ICBMs
and SLBMs in the late 1970s and how
rapidly are they to be deployed?

—In the period of the 1980s, in light of an-
ticipated changes in US forces, how is the
Soviet force mix to be drawn from the
various fixed and mobile systems in order
to achieve desired counterforce capabilities
and force survivability?

—Which research and development options
should be pursued, and at what level of
effort, in order to deal with the strategic
environment during the lifetime of the pro-
posed agreement and beyond?

~—— What strategic advantages and disadvan-
tages would there be in subsequent offen-
sive force reductions?

26. Delivery Vehicle Limit. The present (1
February 1975) Soviet intercontinental attack force,
in terms of forces we assume to be counted under
the Vladivostok limits, is structured as follows
(see also first column in Table 1):

— An ICBM force of 1,607 ICBM launchers at
26 complexes. This number now includes
1,439 operational launchers and 168 launch-
ers which are under construction, under-
Page-17
TABLE 1
Soviet Forces For Intercontinental Attack
1 Feb 1975 Mid-1977*
ICBMs ... ae 1,476
SS-7, SS-8 ........ 48
SS-9, SS-18 ......... 308
SS-11, SS-19, SS-X-17 1,030
$-13, SS-X-16 Fixed .. 60
SS-X-16 Mobile . 307
SLBMs 886-904
On the Y class .. 544
On the D class . 342-360
On the G and H classes . 0
Bombers ** 130
Bear 100
Bison 30
TOTAL . 2451 2,492-2,510

* As projected in NIE 11-3/8-74 with the following ex-
ceptions: 16 SLBM launchers on three submarines used as
test platforms are excluded, and uncertainty regarding the
number of launchers on the modified D-class submarine is
taken into account.

Under the Interim Agreement mobile ICBMs are not
proscribed, but the US stated unilaterally that it “would
consider the deployment of operational land-mobile ICBM
Jaunchers during the period of the Interim Agreement as
inconsistent with the objectives of that Agreement.”

*If Backfire bombers and Bison tankers are included,

they would increase the totals and compound Soviet prob-.

lems in meeting a limit of 2,400 delivery vehicles, as shown
in the Force A variants which include Backfires (Tables 5
and 6).

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department
of the Air Force, believes that, since the Backfire has inter-
continental capabilities and might be included in the 2,400
aggregate ceiling (as shown in the Force A variant tables),
it should be included in this table.

going modification or conversion, or other-
wise in a nonoperational status. Of these
1,607 launchers, 209 are SS-7 and SS-8
launchers, which under the terms of the
Interim Agreement can and probably will
be dismantled and replaced by SLBM
launchers. Thirty-four of the SS-7 launchers
are now nonoperational, and we believe
dismantling of SS-7 and SS-8 launchers is
likely to begin when the submarine carrying
the 741st SLBM begins sea trials in the
third quarter of 1975.

—An SLBM force of 704 SLBM launchers.
(Included are three submarines which have
a total of 16 modern SLBM launchers and
are used as test platforms.) At present
there are about 260 additional modern
ballistic missile submarine launchers under
construction. By mid-1977 the Soviets are
expected to have 886 to 904 SLBM launch-
ers operational,

—A Bear and Bison force of 140 aircraft. Of
these, 70 are Bear bombers equipped with
the Kangaroo ASM, which has a range of 645
km and the other 70 are Bear and Bison
bombers with an internal bombload. In
addition, there are 50 Bison bombers con-
figured as tankers which can be reconverted
to a bomber configuration but which are
not treated as bombers in this report be-
cause they are used to support the bomber
force.

27. Before the Vladivostok Summit, our best
estimate in NIE 11-3/8-74 was based on the assump-
tion that the limitations of the Interim Agreement
would continue. It projected that by mid-1977 the
Soviets would have a total of approximately 2,500
ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy bombers (see second
column of Table 1). We assumed a normal pace
of construction of new submarines and the dis-
mantling of most SS-7 and S$S-8 launchers and
older ballistic missile submarine launchers as pro-
vided for in the Interim Agreement. We also as-
sumed that by mid-1977 the Soviets would have
started deploying a mobile ICBM force.

28. To comply with the aggregate limit of 2,400
agreed to at Vladivostok, it appears that by mid-
1977 the Soviets would have to reduce their total
force by approximately 100 delivery vehicles. After
1977, as more D-class submarines reach sea trials,
further reductions would have to be made. If, as
expected, land-mobile ICBMs are deployed, the
problem will be compounded.

29. MIRV Limit. The ceiling of 1,320 MIRVed
delivery vehicles would allow the Soviets consider-
able flexibility in determining the composition of
Page-18
their MIRVed force. In the near term it should
have little impact on their plans to deploy MIRVed
missiles.

30. The Soviets are converting SS-9 and SS-11
silos for their new MIRVed ICBMs or are preparing
for such construction at ten complexes containing
a total of 798 launchers.

Co jssiss are already operational
at one of four SS-11 complexes (containing
a total of 410 silos) where this MIRVed
system is being installed.

“JsS-X-17s probably will be
operational by June 1975 at one SS-11 com-
plex, containing 110 silos, where the newer
system will be deployed.

— Five SS-9 complexes, containing a total of
278 silos, are being converted for the SS-18.
SS-18s with single RVs are already
‘operational, and the MIRVed version prob-
ably will be ready for deployment later
this year.

31. Assuming that these programs will be com-
pleted, there are several avenues open to the Soviets
for additional MIRVed missiles under the ceiling
of 1,320. We believe there will be strong institu-
tional pressures to develop MIRVed SLBMs and
to install them on at least some D-class submarines.

We continue to expect
development and deployment of an SS-N-8 follow-
on with MIRVs. It probably will not become opera-
tional until the period 1978-1980, however.

32. The Soviets also may convert additional_SS-9
and $5-L1 silos for the new MIRVed ICBMs{_

Deployment of MIRVed
missiles at these SS-9 and SS-11 complexes would
depend on the number of MIRVed SLBMs de-
ployed.

 

33. Deployment of a MIRVed SS-X-16 is another
way the Soviets could go in approaching the 1,320
limit. The missile has not been tested with MIRVs
but docs have a postboost vehicle. A MIRVed
version of the SS-X-16 probably could be ready for
deployment a year or so after MIRV testing began.

34. The Soviets could most rapidly approach the
1,320 ceiling by MIRVing only silo-based ICBMs,
since other MIRVed systems have yet to be tested.
The MIRV ceiling in such a force couid be reached
as early as 1980, assuming deployment at the high-
est annual rate demonstrated in the past. If sizable
numbers of MIRVed SLBMs are planned, then the
Soviets probably could not reach the MIRV ceiling
until 1982 or so. These numbers, however, reflect
crash programs aimed at rapid MIRV deployment
for its own sake. We believe the Soviets would
choose more balanced programs, with attainment
of the 1,320 limit by about 1985.

35. Weapon System Vulnerability. The Soviets
probably believe that during the period through
1985 their fixed ICBM force could become more
vulnerable to attack as US forces are improved. To

‘counter the threat to their fixed ICBM force the

Soviets have under way a major program to deploy
their new fixed ICBMs in more survivable silos.
They apparently are also developing a mobile
ICBM. They may believe that silo hardening will
not suffice, and might choose to deactivate some
of the silos where the SS-11 Mod 3 is being
deployed in favor of mobile ICBMs or SLBMs.
Such a choice, however, carries with it a willing-
ness to accept reduced accuracy and reliability as
well as problems with command and control.

36. The Soviets are also taking steps to improve
the survivability of their SLBM force. They are
constructing D-class submarines equipped with the
long-range SS-N-8 missile, which can operate in
protected local areas and still target all of the US.
A new SLBM for Y-class units is apparently under
development. We believe it will have longer range
than the SS-N-6, thereby permitting Y-class units
to operate in arcas where they will be less vulner-
able to detection by acoustic sensors of the US
sound surveillance system (SOSUS). In addition,
Page-19
—top-Geeret:

underground _berthing positions appear to be under
constructios fo reduce the
vulnerability~of Soviet SSBNs to ‘nuclear attack
while they are in port. Given these improvements,
it is unlikely there will be any major reductions
in the SSBN force.

37. Age of Weapon Systems. Age should not be
a prime factor in the choice of Soviet weapon
systems to be given up under the Vladivostok
aggregate limit. The majority of the weapon systems
now in the Soviet ICBM and SLBM forces date
only from the late 1960s or early 1970s, and those
systems which are older probably will already have
been phased out by 1977 under the terms of the
Interim Agreement. As for the Bear and Bison
heavy bombers—most of them built in the 1950s—
the Soviets could keep even these aircraft in service
until the mid-1980s by reducing annual flying hours
and by undertaking a comprehensive overhaul
program.

38. System Effectiveness and Flexibility. The
capability and flexibility of the individual weapon
systems will be major influences in the Soviet
decision-making process. The new generation of’

C

ICBMs has been developed to increase the surviv- .

ability, flexibility, and effectiveness of the Strategic
Rocket Forces (SRF). The Soviets evidently have
placed a premium on improving their targeting

and hard-target capability.
nd MIRVed payloads

sot x

of the $S-X-17, SS-18, and $$-19 systems give them
better targeting capabilities than their predecessors.
In addition,

“hese improvements will add
to the overall flexibility of the Soviet ICBM force
in a preemptive attack and to the targeting poten-
tial of a surviving retaliatory force, giving Soviet
planners more leeway in adapting operational plans
to changing circumstances.

40. To achieve a significant hard-target capa-
bility, the Soviets will have to depend primarily
on their ICBM force. The new ICBMs, with CEPs
between 0.25 and 0.5 nautical mile, will_be more
accurate than the systems they replace.{”

With these new systems, the bulk
of the ICBM" force will have better hard-target
capabilities than in the past. However, to acquire
high kill probabilities against US missile silos the
Soviets will need the improved or follow-on systems
projected for deployment in the 1980s.

41. For the foreseeable future, SLBMs will remain
an important retaliatory weapon, able to survive
a nuclear attack and retum a strike against un-
hardened military, industrial, and population tar-
gets. In addition, while present-day SLBMs prob-
ably do not have a hard-target capability they
could be used as first-strike weapons against time-
urgent targets such as US bomber bases.

42. Strategic bombers diversify the Soviet inter-
continental attack force and increase its effective-
ness. Bumbers equipped with free-fall bombs have
a hard-target capability which can be best utilized
if the target is not time urgent. Bombers also have
several important attributes which ballistic missiles
lack. They may be recalled or retargeted in flight,
they are reusable, they have a poststrike recon-
naissance capability, and they can be used in either
a conventional or nuclear war. These attributes
suggest that the Soviets will retain an interconti-
nental bomber force.

43. Recent Investment Decisions. The Soviets
will seck to eliminate or minimize the impact of
the aggregate ceiling limitation on their plans to
improve their forces qualitatively. It is likely that
reductions will take place in those areas of their
forces where investments in force improvements
are not under way or planned. It is probable, more-
over, that some currently planned force improve-
ments will not be made or will be made ona smaller
scale.

44. In the Soviets’ program to upgrade their
ICBM force, no improvement activity has been
detected at the Kostroma SS-1L complex or the
Aleysk SS-9 complex. If the SRF chose to dismantle
ICBM launchers in addition to those for the SS-7
and SS-8, the launchers at these two complexes
Page-20
would be candidates for dismantling. In addition
to the 90 SS-1ls at Kostroma and the 30 SS-9s at
Aleysk, the 60 SS-13 silos at the Yoshkar-Ola com-
plex could also be dismantled if the Soviets opt for
deploying only the mobile version of the SS-X-16.

45. The Soviets could also reduce the delivery-
vehicle aggregate by curtailing the D-class sub-
marine program. This appears very unlikely because
the D-class apparently will be the mainstay of
the Soviet SSBN force. If the Soviets plan to deploy

* substantially fewer SLBMs than the 950 permitted
under the Interim Agreemént, it is likely that some
Y-class submarines would be dismantled.t Most
of the submarines of this class are older than those
of the D-class, and they currently carry a less effec-
tive SLBM and are more vulnerable to detection
while on missile patrol because of SOSUS coverage.

46. The Soviets have not made any major addi-
tions to the Bear/Bison bomber force in over a
decade, but some Soviet statements suggest that
they are developing a new heavy bomber. If the
decision is made to deploy a new bomber, the
Soviets probably could not begin to replace their
Bears and Bisons before 1980 at the earliest. In any
event, the intrinsic flexibility and poststrike recon-
naissance capability of a bomber probably will

 

mean that some heavy bombers will be retained ©

through the mid-1980s.

47. Two new programs—those for the SS-X-20
IRBM and the Backfire bomber—will impact on
the force composition the Soviets plan to have
eventually. Even if neither of these systems is con-
strained by the proposed 1975 agreement, their
deployment might alter the presumed mission or
number of other forces included under the aggre-
gate ceiling.

48. The SS-X-20 IRBM—a two-stage variant of
the SS-X-16—apparently has a MIRVed payload
and may be launched from a mobile platform.
Large-scale deployment of the SS-X-20 would
enable the Soviets to replace older MRBMs or
IRBMs and to reduce reliance on ICBMs for target-
ing against peripheral areas—primarily in China

‘The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the
Navy, believes it unlikely that the Soviets plan to dismantle
any of the Y-class SSBNs.

and Europe. As many as 310 SS-1ls may now be
targeted against peripheral areas, and some of their
replacements—the SS-X-17 and SS-19—may also
be assigned peripheral targets. If so, deployment
of the SS-X-20 might permit dismantling of some
SS-11 launchers.

49. The Backfire’s range and radius capabilities
are estimated to be approximately the same as those
of the Bison heavy bomber on a high-altitude sub-
sonic mission. These capabilities make the Back-
fire a potential threat to the continental US, but
current evidence is insufficient to determine
whether the Soviets intend to use it for intercon-
tinental missions and, if so, to what extent.> In view
of these capabilities, if the Backfire is excluded
from a SALT TWO agreement, the Soviets may
conclude that more of their Bears and Bisons can
be retired from the heavy bomber force. On the
other hand, inclusion of the Backfire in an agree-
ment could raise the additional question of whether
all or a portion of the Backfire force—in both Long
Range Aviation (LRA) and Soviet Naval Avia-
tion—-should be counted. Obviously, decisions in
this area would significantly affect the mix of forces
under the agreement.

C. Force Projections °

50. Considerable uncertainty exists over what
systems will be included in a SALT TWO agree-
ment based on the principles agreed to at Vladi-
vostok and how the Soviets will structure their
forces. Our force projections illustrate options avail-
able to the Soviets, and result from varying assump-
tions about their objectives, their willingness to
restructure their force mix, and their perception
of the threat posed by US strategic forces.

— Force A is our best estimate. In this pro-
jection we assume the Soviets take a bal-
anced approach requiring only minimal

‘The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department
of the Air Force, believes that some portion of the Backfire
force will probably be assigned missions against the con-
tinental United States.

‘The force projections in this section (Tables 3 through
8) assume that no collateral constraints are in effect. A
discussion of possible effects of collateral constraints is in
the Appendix.
Page-21
force restructuring. We believe they are
likely to opt for this approach because it
would not seriously affect ongoing programs
to upgrade their forces. Both [CBMs and
SLBMs would be MIRVed. We have also
projected a variation of our best estimate
in which we assume that the Backfire will
be counted in the aggregate of intercon-
tinental delivery vehicles.

— Force B assumes the Soviets place primary
emphasis on fixed ICBMs and MIRV only
these systems. The Soviets might opt for
this force structure if they wanted to MIRV
rapidly and maximize the qualitative aspects
of their forces, and if they believed that
silo hardening would be sufficient to ensure
the survivability of their ICBM force.

—Force C assumes the Soviets emphasize
mobile systems and deploy a large number
of MIRVed mobile ICBMs and SLBMs. The
Soviets might take such a course if they were
seriously concerned that their fixed ICBM
force was becoming vulnerable to improved
US forces.

51. These illustrative approaches, because of
different objectives, would involve different priori-
ties for the services affected—the SRF, the Navy,
and LRA. Force A would probably accommodate
bureaucratic interests best, whereas Force B or
Force C would tend to give priority to one or
another of the services. This being the case, services
that came out lower in priority with respect to
strategic forces would probably push for expanded
programs in other areas. The concepts involved
in the alternative force structures, and the possible
effects on forces not limited by SALT, are sum-
marized in Table 2.

52. Force A: The Best Estimate. This Force in-
corporates a mix of ICBMs, SLBMs, and bombers,
which would accommodate bureaucratic interests
and strike a balance between counterforce-capable
systems and force survivability. In this option the
Soviets reach and maintain the aggregate limit by
somewhat reducing the number of fixed ICBMs
and Bear/Bison heavy bombers. The deployment

rates and weapon system characteristics are com-
parable to those projected in the best estimate
(Force 1) of NIE 11-3/8-74. The SRF dismantles
silo-based $S-11 launchers in order to deploy land-
mobile SS-X-16s, and LRA retires its Bison bombers
so that the ICBM and SLBM modernization pro-
grams can continue. No new bomber is projected
in this Force. The Soviets allocate MIRVed missiles
within the limit of 1,320 permitted by the treaty
to both the SRF and the Navy.

53. The Central Intelligence Agency, the Depart-
ment of State, the National Security Agency, and the
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department
of the Air Force, estimate that by 1985 the Soviets
will have a'force of 1,152 MIRVed ICBM launchers
consisting of 262 $S-18 or follow-on large missiles
and 890 smaller ICBMs—SS-X-17s, SS-19s, and a
new small follow-on. They believe the Soviets will
deploy 110 single-RV $S-18s and maintain this level
through 1983 because of that weapon's counter-
force capability. In addition, this Force projects
that the Soviets will MIRV only the 162 launchers
on the nine lengthened D-class submarines—the
Mod Ds.

54. The Defense Intelligence Agency, the Assist-
ant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of
the Army, and the Director of Naval Intelligence,
Department of the Navy, believe that the Soviets
will place more emphasis on survivable systems.
In their view, the Soviets will equip all of the 390
missiles on the D and Mod D SSBN force with
MIRVs and deploy a larger mobile ICBM force.
They believe the Soviets will equip all of their
modem large ballistic missiles and the missiles for
all 610 SS-X-17 and SS-19 launchers with MIRVs,
but no additional small ICBMs."

‘The Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, De-
partment of State, believes that Force A is the best pro-
jection which can be made at present. He notes, however,
that the Soviets may well elect to deploy larger numbers
of MIRVed SLBMs in the early 1980s as projected in the
variant of the best-estimate Force. Assuming the Vladivostok
accord is successfully completed, Soviet decisions with regard
to whether to emphasize ICBMs or SLBMs under the 1,320
MIRV limit may not be made until the follow-on SALT
negotiations—and especially the negotiation of reductions—
are under way.
Page-22
Rationale. .

Services.

  

ICBMs....

SLBMs........

Heavy Bombers

Otiter Systems.

1 See paragraph 56

Table 2

Comparison of Illustrative Soviet Force Concepts

  

imal impact on on-
going programs to upgrade
ICBM force.

SRF and LRA take force cuts.
SRF and Navy get new systems.

Some SS-11 launchers deactivated
but a mobile ICBM is deployed.
MIRVs on SS-X-17s, SS-18s,
88-195, and their follow-on mis-
siles.

62 SSBNs with 934 SLBMs are
deployed. MIRVs on the 9 Mod
D-class SSBNs. (Alternative
View: MIRVs on all D-class
SSBNs.)*

Force reduced significantly and
no new heavy bomber is de-
ployed.

LRA compensated by Backfire,
SRF compensated by SS-X-20
deployment.

? See paragraph 54.

2 See paragraph 58.

4 See paragraphs 49 and 50.

55. Summarized for comparison below are the
two views of the force mix of a best estimate in

Emphasis on Fixed [CBMs

Accelerates acquisition of MIRVs
and other qualitative improve-
ments.

SRF gets preference. LRA and
Navy take cuts.

All MIRVs in the SRF.

‘Three Y-class SSBNs dismantled.
No MIRVs on SLBMs.

Force reduced significantly and
no new heavy bomber deployed.

LRA compensated by Backfire.

  
  

 
 

Force C
Emphasis on Mobility

    

Emphasizes mobile systems for
survivability,

Navy and LRA get preference at
expense of SRF.

Substantial numbers of fixed
launchers deactivated but a
large foree of mobile ICBMs
(MIRVed) is deployed.

New SSBN with MIRVed SLBM.
Force goes beyond Interim Agree-
ment limits.

Force expanded, with new bombers
deployed.

SRF expands SS-X-20 deployment
to handle all Eurasian targets.

and Bear bombers and make additional adjustment
to their missile forces to maintain the aggregate

 

 

 

 

1985: ceiling.

CIA, State, NSA, AF DIA, Army, Navy 57. Force B: Primary Emphasis on Fixed ICBMs.
Aggregate . 2,382 2,400 For this Force, we assume that most ICBM char-
veces a acteristics and deployment rates are comparable
a and owed a to those given in the high Forces: (3 and 4) of
Mebiel tobnel 7 i NIE 11-3/8-74. The higher technology levels of
Bombers 90 88 Force B (as reflected in more accurate missile
MIRV Limit ... 1,314 1,308 CEPs) are intended to be illustrative of potential
— Soviet force improvements judged possible but
$S-18, Large follow-on .. 262 308 not most likely in NIE 11-3/8-74. They need not

SS-X-17, SS-19, Small o . .
follow-on... 800 610 necessarily be tied to any one force mix. Sur-
S$-N-8 follow-on 162 390 vivability would be improved through silo harden-

ing, rather than through deployment of mobile
ICBMs or increased numbers of SLBMs. The SRF
would have priority in getting new resources, with

56. In the variants to the best estimate in which
Backfire is included, the Soviets retire all the Bison

W7
Page-23
Fop—feerot

the Navy and LRA giving up some systems to
stay within the aggregate of 2,400 delivery vehicles.

58. The aggregate in this Force consists of ap-
proximately 1,400 ICBMs, 900 SLBMs, and 100
bombers. To reduce their delivery vehicles to this
level the Soviets dismantle their SS-7 and $S-8
ICBMs and retire some bombers. To maintain the
aggregate force level below 2,400, the Soviet Navy
phases out three Y-class submarines containing 48
launchers,8 but continues to introduce additional
D-class- submarines through 1979. There is no
mobile missile deployment in this Force, and the
SS-X-16 receives only token deployment in S$S-13
silos at the Yoshkar-Ola complex. With ‘the em-
phasis on fixed ICBMs, older bombers are retained
and no new heavy bomber is projected.

59. Only ICBMs are equipped with MIRVs in
this Force. It is assumed the Soviets MIRV all but
20 of their modern large ballistic missiles by 1981—
these 20 being the single-RV variant of the $$-18.
All 1,030 of the SS-11 launchers are converted for
MIRVed missile deployment by 1983. These
MIRVed missiles initially consist primarily of the
SS-X-I7 and $$-19 and later a new small follow-
on missile which enters the force in 1980. It is also_
Projected that a follow-on missile with extended
range and a single RV is deployed on the Y-class
SSBN beginning in 1978, and that a follow-on
missile with a single RV is deployed on the D-class
SSBN beginning in 1979. No new heavy bomber is
projected in this Force.

60. Force C: Emphasis on Mobility. In this pro-
jection, the Soviets seek to structure their strategic
forces with weapons which they consider the least
vulnerable to destruction by an improved US
Minuteman missile. Mobile systems comprise the
bulk of the forces and, by 1985, 180 mobile ICBMs,
992 SLBMs, and 190 heavy bombers are in service.
Y-class submarines are replaced with a new sub-
marine and the last of the Bisons with a new heavy
bomber. The fixed ICBM force is reduced signifi-
cantly. In addition to the deactivation of the SS-7

“See footnote 4 (at paragraph

 

45) for comment of the

Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy.

and SS-8 launchers, it is assumed the Soviets will
dismantle 36 modern large ballistic missile launchers
and 340 SS-11 launchers.

61. The Soviets are assumed to allocate an in-
creasing percentage of the allowed 1,320 MIRVed
missiles to mobile systems. This Force projects
180 MIRVed mobile ICBMs and 252 MIRVed
SLBM launchers. The Soviets, however, have not
significantly decreased the ability of their offen-
sive strategic force to destroy hard targets. Al-
though they have reduced the number of fixed
ICBM launchers, the number of fixed ICBM
launchers and of MIRVed SS-18s and $$-19s de-
ployed in the 1980s will still provide a significant
counterforce capability. Figure 1 compares the
levels of fixed and mobile launchers and on-line
RVs in the three force projections for the years
1975, 1980, and 1985.

D. Quantitative Measures of Offensive Forces

62. The charts in Figure 2 compare the Force
A projected in this report (Vladivostok Best) with
Force 1 of NIE 11-3/8-74 (NIE Best) and with
the US strategic offensive forces called for in the
1 January 1975 Department of Defense Five-Year
Defense Plan (US FYDP). The comparisons are
made in terms of conventional static measures such
as numbers of delivery vehicles (total and MIRVed)
numbers of missile RVs and bomber weapons, and
throw weights. Force 1 is used for comparison
because it represents a likely Soviet force under
the less restrictive limitations imposed by the
Interim Agreement. The static measures shown for
the US should be considered only ‘as a basis for
reference and not as predictions of actual US
deployments. It should be noted, however, that an
improved Minuteman III is included in this latest
FYDP and that it significantly increases the US
counterforce capability.

E. Implications for the Strategic Environment

63. We remain confident that during the next
ten years the Soviets will not be able to launch an
attack on US strategic forces of such size and pre-
cision as to reduce damage to themselves to accept-
Page-24
. HopSoseat,
Soviet Missiles: Fixed and Mobile* Figure 1
Total Launchers beeen
2,500 ~
pe
}— On-Line RVs
Mobile Fixed Mobile
1975 1,629 588
1980 4,568 1,360
1985 7,162 1,216
19
Total Launchers
2500 Force B
j ‘On-Line RVs
Mobile Fixed Mobile
1975-1549 588
1980 6508 726
1985 114,776 690
1975 77 79 BL 83 85
Total Launchers Force C
2,500
On-Line RVs
Faxed Mobite
1500 F 1975 1,629 588
1980 4,394 1,580
1985 5512 1,984
S500
1975 77 79 81 83 85
* Mobile includes §.BM and land-mobile [CBM launchers.
** The alternate view of DIA, Army, and Navy is that the Soviets will have 5,084 tixed and 1,452 mobile ondine RVs in
1980, and 6,142 fixed and 1,836 mobile ondine RVs in 1985.
sess 295.04
Page-25
able levels. Similarly, the Soviets would hold the
same view of the outcome of a US attack on them.
Thus, the basis for mutual deterrence should con-
tinue to exist for the next ten years, although sub-
stantial force improvements will be achieved.

64. A principal reason for this judgment is that
we do not foresee during the next ten years tech-
nological advances which would sharply alter the
strategic balance in the Soviets’ favor. Nevertheless,
Soviet research and development, particularly in
strategic defensive systems, bear especially close
watching in the years ahead.

65. In general, the three forces we project differ
more in underlying motive than in demonstrable
strategic effect. In terms of strategic effect, what
is alike about these forces is more important than
what is different about them.

20

—They are large, diverse, and relatively
flexible.

—They develop significant countersilo capa-
bilities, Force B somewhat earlier than the
other two.

—They appear survivable enough to maintain
an assured retaliatory capability.

This was also true of force projections in NIE
11-3/8-74—which, however, varied a good deal
more widely. We have said in the past that, given
the general character of strategic offensive forces
and the rough standoff they Jead to, the most sig-
nificant variables and uncertainties have to do with
technological qualities, operating practices, and
employment plans. The Vladivostok accord tends
to strengthen this observation.
Page-26
Quantitative Comparisons of Forces for Intercontinental Attack"

 

  

 

   

 

Total Delivery Vehicles Total MIRVed Delivery Vehicles
Thousands Thousands
3 3
NIE Best
US FYOP
Vladivostok
NIE Best
US FYOP
Vladivostok
Best
Attemate
Viadivostok
Best
1975 77 79 81 83 85 1975 7 79 81 83 85
On-Line Missile Throw Weight
On-Line Missile Throw Weight and Bomber Loadings
Million Pounds: Mitfion Pounds.
20 20
- US FYOP
NIE Best
15 Vladivostok
NIE Best Best
Vladivostok
Best
10
5
—-—— — US FYOP
1975 77 79 BL 83 85

1975 7 79 81 83 85

Sésine 2.75 014
Page-27
Figure 2

* Viadivostok Best refers to the Force A projection in this paper, and NIE Best to Force 1 in NIE
11-3/8-74,

The US programed force (FYDP) is derived and extrapolated from the force projections of the US
Department of Defense Five-Year Defense Program as of January 1975.

Total delivery vehicles include 1CBMs'operational, in conversion, or under construction; SLBM launchers”
Operational, under conversion, or in shipyard overhaul; and operational bombers. Excluded are SLBM
launchers in SSBNs which have not yet begun initial sea trials and bombers configured for tanker or
reconnaissance missions.

The intelligence community disagrees on the most likely mix of MIRVed systems for Force A. Two
alternative views are presented in the chart of total MIRVed delivery vehictes.

On-line static measures exclude ICBM silo launchers under construction or conversion and SLBM
launchers on SSBNs undergoing sea trials! conversion, or shipyard overhaul.

Missile payloads composed of MRVs (Which are not independently targetable) are counted as one RV.
Bomber loadings are essentially the same as shown in Volume II of NIE 11-3/8-74,
Backfire bombers are not included in| these figures. Their inclusion under the terms of the Vladivostok

accord would alter the composition of the Soviet intercontinental attack forces, as shown in the Force A
Variant and Alternate Force A Variant projections (Tables § and 6).

21
Page-28
TABLES OF FORCE PROJECTIONS
Page-29
Z61/ZT ae Bele O 0 0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 0 0 0 0

Ove/st —oze/oz_—oow/sz_aseizz = zuzyet ~—zotien 96/9 zele 0 0 0

0 0 0 o8/s Oot/or —oF/ST_  ozeyoz = ozevoz «=—wszyor «gata atte

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ¥9/r O9t/or = ore/st ——oze/oz

0 9 0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 aus ve/8

Seller secish = SEL/Oh§BELISY RELISH «= FLL/TS —BSL/OS~—aeLizs~—sgaz/oe «OV 88s/or

eee'l ese‘ = gse'gge't get “ese'T ese" acer g0r'T ats gust boot
0 os ot ot 0 0 0 of 081 oer oot oor
0 0 0 0 a 09 aL ze ze 9 ¥9 ve
0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 o 0 ve
° os oat oat at 09 Be zor zoe 908 bee, sor
oot oot 001 oot oot oot se os se. 0 0 0
09 08 09 09 08 09 09 09 09 09 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 09 09
082 ove, ozt 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 0

or ot ose oz ost os 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 09 oot 09% ove oly ove 062 002 0s

06! 061 o6t 061 061 oot 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 0 08 oot or oe! 0 or

0 0 os out 062 082 Ole *  opF ove oo 008

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 001 oez lp

88 a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9

bal bel vLt gr 82 oe 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 ve we 801 got 80! gL + 9% 0

oF 2 ou ort ott ou 6 ve os 8% ot

0 0 0 0 0 ° a z a a ar

0 0 0 0 0 0 ve aL ost gor zee

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 °

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6I

° 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 99 99

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ay 08

sse'l poet Be't es" bet gaat 192" gse't toa't soe'l FET

Seer F861 861 z86t 1861 og6r 6261 8261 L261 96t Seer $26t
Tt. an gat

swad py,

1 (@wUNsY as8g)
SIUyEIISUOD [BIOITIIOD IMoYHIM seoL0g yOBIDY [BUaUNUODIAVUT yaIAOg :y do10q

£914

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

“a swig)»
ey pews) a,
£/2-9-N-SS/A,
“TO-N-SS/A
“S°NSS/IT-H

 

   

 

seeeessautt eo,
SWa@TS/*NaSs

“SN AOL [B10],

 

“TSS
“"8I-$S/6-SS.
ess

 
 

‘oui, yo syayouns-y

OW (AY 1) ¥ POW OI-X-Ss

“*Paxtd (AW 1) ¥ POW GI-X-Ss.

e1-Ss

AULN) Uo-mojoy yous
(AUDA) @ POW BI-ss
(AUT) ¥ POW 6I-SS
“MAUIA) @ POW LI-X-SS
HAUT) ¥ POW L-X-SS
. “8/2 POW T1-$g
1 POW TI-Sg

WABI) Vo-molloy a8s07
“ (AULA) O POW aI-sg
“CAMTN) Z POW BTSs
VAY 1) T POW 8I-S8
b POW GSS
% POW 6-88
1 POW 6-SS
“SS
PIBH L-S8
OS LSS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

| Uo slagouney

SW@Ol

24

 

   

Ff 22 blankly

“
Page-30
“aquiog Aaway mou v puv qyuiouy oayyoug puy ‘vosig “sag r0ddns 01 pesn
84 Pinoe arqat ‘auodsuws pipusS 94-1] MoU ays jo iuduvs JoxUY) ¥ BUIdo[aAop azv SIMS OU2 IWUI BoUapIAD ouLOS sf asoy “JaquIOG ¥ or ParZaAUOD aq PINOD aJwOITY FIN ¢
SA0GE UmOYS $9910) Jo UoHs|soduion aya ser]e PInom siya ‘Os JT “OOH'Z Jo FuIlI99 ayeBos9Fe ayy ut Papniouy aq [rm sworsds asayr Jo uv sr mou 20U Op aA
(0861 e20jaq aiqulfeae owooeq row [Hm WO-MOLIO) B-N-SS PPAUIW MAU ¥ IY BAa!|aq owWOS ,
‘Wonreiuesaid jo aay 40} saiqua aur uy pasn ueaq aavy sxoyouny| gy ‘sioyouns] Og 40 gf AnI¥O Pinoo NSS sFBI-C Po mau ays aya povewnisa 6 ay YBnourTy
“AABN 942 Jo oWrsvdag ‘oouatyjaIUL
UT asuajoq ayr jo maja arvusad[e 942 s05 p aIqQu 29g ;

 

INAUN Jo sores 847 Pu ‘Sway 943 Jo ruowraudeg ‘saUD8JaUT J0J WME Jo Jory) qumisissy ay1 ‘fouady oouad,

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

° 0 0 0 or ot or ot 91 or or or “*S19UOUNYT WEIS 8S¥]9-H  -—D

ose She ove see ole set ovr on og ss oe 0 ane * daQuog asyyoug

4 08 0% St Se Td of of of os os os ae Torre sess ses ggaquBy vosg

02% 99% 09 09% oh 91z 981 9st 821 Ter 96 99 ” Teese yeurayekg gayi

zor zor zor zor Zor 291 zor ws 0 0 0 0 © 'UO-MOL0F B°N-SS

068 Ors 0tL 009 009 009 009 oz¢ Otr Le 09 or ‘ BUS /61-SS]LI-X-SS

9S, o1g 861 861 Ost ser 801 BL *S 9% 0 0 += **UO-sO][0J 28297 /81-Sy

WIE'T BIST 080'T 096 8h6 006 028 z0L bly 96 09 Ol TTT SOYA ATOANIC PRAYTW [BIOL

06 06 06 oor oot oor sor Sot sor ovr ont ov “*'ssoquog <avay

6 vE6 vE6 bee. ves veo ¥E6 O16 988 Z08 00L 880 “SWEATS wo
gse'r 8se'T 8se'T 8SE'1 8se'T gse'r ese'l gse't cob‘) Zis't eLs't 209'T . SWEOL N

  

o8b'% 28e'S 288% 26E'% 26E'S Z6E'% 6E'S eles v6E'% bOh'Z ees sep'z

 

 

“os s9poiyaq Au9atiag jog,

¥ d0104 Jo Kuswwng

 
 

 

  

 

 

 

 

0 9 0 0 0 0 0 “oO 0 se se se Cy Te wos
06 06 06 oot 001 001 sor sol sor sor SOT sor — 77 co awag
06 06 06 oot oot oor sor $01 sor ort ort ort a “T sequiog Aasay
yeoce —vogiz9ree/z9—beB/z9veaizo ve sizo ve io Olg/o9 pes zoB/9s ~—Ou/es «—gggygg tte SWEISISNASS [WIOg,
9e/e 9e/% 9e/e 9e/% selz 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 “CAUTIN) YO-S0]105 8-N-Sgiq_ POW,
8F/b Sh/y 8h/e 8t/y 8¥/> 8b/b 8t/> 0 0 0 0 0 aaa “ ENSS/C
zie zie = atte zine zune arte 8e1/8 81/8 82/8 88 atte Bye [SS O-N-SS/A
Soler — 961/E1 —eLeL eter get/et —oat/tt gular 81/8 821/8 821/8 zie BUe renee au BO
801/9 ally ele 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (AMIN) @ ev /q pow
aut psig o6/s gue sete 291/68 29146 0 0 0 0 CME) ¥ 88387 /q poy

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 z01/6 o6/s 0 0 a

 
 

“"""a8°NSS/C POW

Ost/st Ost/St O81/ST OST/ST O81 /ST O8I/ST O81/St vOZILT Osti/st ester Celt OZ1/Ot a 1SN-SS/C
Page-31
coer atte ele 0 0 0 0 0 0 a) ° . . a

  
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

  

  

 

 

“@ 1BWS/ A
Obe/st —oze/oz~—oob/se seize aueyat e626 /9 zele 0 0 pew puugy x
0 0 0 ogys Oat/or —oFe/st ozs loz ozeloz sion gust ere “8/-9-N-SS/K

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 bolh Ost/or —ovz/st—ozgjoz UTON-SS/K

0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 0 zuly ¥2/8 es “SN-SS/I-H
Selisr —8e4/6F ~—SeL/s> ~—Bezise ge /gy FLLTS —Seejos stiles gezios baggy 88sjor ousisy | 7 eu ag

. *WETS/SNESS

Seer gee'T geet gue y Ble'r —gue't see'r —guett gor zis't gag't LOOT ree “SNOT [voy

oe oor os 0 0 0 0 0g oer oe oot oot Sean ee “oInss

0 0 0 0 ar 09 a ze ee 99 +9 be ia 8I-Ss/e-ss

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° ve ngs

on oor os 0 a 09 ze zor zo 961 bee gor 2ut| JJo sxoyouney
ot ost ost 081 ost oat 06 09 of 0 0 0 HOON (AUD ¥ POW Ot-x-s

09 09 09 09 09 09 08 09 09 09 o ° pax Cay 1) ¥ POW Ot: 88

0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 09 09 “etss
ost og ° o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 : IVER; vormorjoy |puug
00 ost og 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o ) Yo-mojto; {pws
or ot ose ose ost og 0 0 0 0 0 1 (AUD) & POW 6I-sg

0 0 09 091 09% ove or ose 06g 008 og . (AULD ¥ Pow 6I-gg

0 os ost 002 008 oot 0 0 0 0 0 ah CAYLIA) © POW LI-X-Sg °
0 0 0 0 0 001 002 00g oet oe or a “WAUTAD ¥ POW LIeX-sg a
0 OL out oze, osz ose ore ove oor oo» oor ile POW Ti-gg

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 09 oez op Presses st pone tregg
8 ab 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 aie MAUI) wo-moyjos oB187

Sat Bat Rz1 821 96 8 0 0 0 0 ° “MAULA) O POW gt-gg

96 get ost ogt ost ost og! cer 8 a 0 . KawIW) @ POW 8I-ss

0 0 ° 0 4 02 4 02 08 oz or “EDT pox 8I-SS

0 0 0 0 0 0 ar at a ar at + POW 6-sg

0 0 0 0 0 o ¥% ze ost 891 20a : "% POW 6-SS

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 . “LOW 6-Sg

0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 0 er BSS

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 90 90 PAVE LSS

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 F “ . . 08 LSS
80e'T BLe'T 82e'T 82e'T g9e'T ster 908'T 922 'T 908'T ore'T eT 6EF'T “eull Yo srayounwy

*waO1
$861 #861 £861 z8or 1861 0861 6261 8261 Lu61 L6r seer Seer
nn EET ag
swaAP IY,

 

doreunsg wag Aavy ‘Away ‘yrq) A
SWUPHSUOD FwIAIOD InoYIUM sodI0g YouY Twivaunuoosaiuy rafaog zy aosog areusarty 5

wae,
Page-32
‘sequiog Kavoy mau v puv yeiouy ajyoeg puv ‘vosig ‘svag r0ddns 01 pasn
94 Pinon Yaryas “aodsuwsa pipuR) g4-T] MAU ayr Jo rUdIZUA JoxUU) w BuIdojaaap alu siaIAOg ayI 1942 BoUapIAa awIOS s} U2YL “aqwwog ¥ 07 paiaauos aq pinos ajuouty s{uL
“wonwrussoid Jo a¥va 10y saiqua ays uy pasn uoaq aavy sioyouny| gy ‘ayouND] Og 40 gi AII¥O PINOD NSS ss¥IO-G POW wou oy Ty poroUiNse sf ay yBnoyay,

“SNaSg UO
{9940} AUTIN 242 JO rueoed Og) sioYouNs PAAYIW. OB Furmbov <qozoys ‘a1 BUAUTW Aq 2010} sseIO-q a[quajains ozoW 419y3 Jo kayiqudeo ayy Fuysvosouy soy 4do [TM
. “HOYOUNT, QI-X-SS OST JO G10} afqow v Aojdep puw Ayqow YFnosys Arqeaiains WO] o10w 40; do Wa

. *uOIsJ9A PAAYTW-wou v uy pakoidep oq
CSIP MEM HOHE EOL VOrmo|foy [BUS 9Yy YaIH LI-X-E oys oov[der puL ‘soud soMo[s v 1¥ UAOPMUIP TI-gg B41 exvIePUN ‘sHGOI pInd| SWS O19 [U0 AUIW IK
“apeoap our UIyrIM salss;u e813] Soe Ie AUIW A—
staraog aya IBYr ore (BOUIOS s1y2 04 SoOUDIE;Os 942 Aq parvoIpA}) | a1quJ, WoJs s@BURYS ayr UI parda{jos SiUaWSPNI ayy;

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

0 0 0 0 or or or or 91 91 or et S1QYDUNYT WATS 8¥[-H P -D
ose Sho 0% SES. Ola * 9at OF oll 08 se 0g 0 corer ss esses jaqmog ayyoeg
0g 0% 0% St St 3 Of of of os 0s os . eae “"gdoyuay vosig
Le «998 09%, 08%, SS 91g 9st Ost O21 é1 98 99 . creeses ss euyazedg 8430,
06¢ Ble oee 282, vES O8t ool vs 0 0 0 0 ” . “** {UO-MOT10} §-N-SS
org O18 O19 O19 O19 org ore oss tr Le 09 or T7778", UOrMOUOS [BUS /BI-SS/LI-X-SS
808 808 80E 808 lz See Ost cel +8 ar 0 oO a 1WO-MO[[OJ OB1VT/BI-SS
80e'T 962'T 8ho'T 008 'T O81'T be0'T a6 902 vos ele 09 ol “* 8811YaA A194119q PPANTW [801
88 88 88 88 88 88 88 $Ol sor OFT Or OFT i siaquiog Savoy
vee 86 ¥e6 bee Fe6 e6 ¥e6 O16 088 208 002 889 1S : swEaTS
BLe'T 82e'T Ble't 8le'T Ble'T gze'T 82e'T 82E'T 80r'T ais‘ els'T 209'T —— a SWaor

 
 
 

 

27

 

00F'z ooF'z ors oor 00% 'Z 00% 's 00% 'z e6e's 66e‘Z ¥Sh't BIb's sere

 
 

“*s9pstyaa Aza poy,

¥ soog avuoyly jo dsvmwng

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o se ge SE an ‘ Te" wos:
88 88 88 88 88 88 88 sor gOr sot Sor sor an . . . 7 ‘wg
88 88 88 88 8g aR as sor sor ObT OF OFT oe cores sguaquiog AavaH

 

486/29 ¥e6/9 ¥86/29 ve6/29 ¥E6/29 ¥E6/29 ¥e6/29 016/09 988/89 208/95 ooL/es B89/EG “SAG TS/SNESS [WOL

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

98/2 98/2 9e/e 9e/e 98/% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 “(CAUTA) Uo-moll0} @-N-SS/d POW
8h/h oe/e 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Te CATA) ¥ 28287 /
0 att 8blb 8b/h 8h/b 8h/h Bhly 0 0 0 0 0 on iS N-SS/A
ate aL atte Ble Bite atk 828 8eU/8 821s 82t/8 aL Btyfh e . “VON-SS/A,
96T/Et o6T/er 96t/er 96T/er 961/er OOT/TT 9Lt/21 821/8 82/8 Bes ai Gh cereeeer seers ss Saat BO
01/9 Glib gel 0 0 0 0 0 O 0 0 0 “"""“CAUMTA) © eV T/q pow
Sift ysie 06/¢ Seth OSt/L 29/6 Zol/6 w/e 0 0 0 0 — “(AMTA) ¥ 28287 /q pow
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 80r/a zoe 06/¢ 0 o . 7" a8°N-SS/C POW
zLl9 vale 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 AMIN) © ee T/q
801/6 Ost/er 8Ol/Ft Ozt/or BL19 ele 9 0 0 0 0 0 ue “OCAMTAD ¥ 88s8T/C
0 0 aut 09/9 801/6 est/et OB8I/st- vOS/LE O8T/ST ost/er roarnae oetjor °° ya 18-N-SS/C
Page-33
261/21 SL cele 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 on onenenel ae “a UsUs/A
ZOU/et Bla/Lt BSE/2e, BSEl2S ZL2/L1 Z6U/2t 96/9 Zele 0 0 0 0 i vy ows/A
0 0 0 Bh/e PRB. Ove/st 028/02 0z£/0% 9gz/ol LIT Sik : Te S/O N SSA i
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 vol OOT/Or —OFB/ST_—OBE/OZ 7 Te TENSE R
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 O 0 ally vals vols \ : S*N°SS/II-H i
060/97 069/9% 069/9F 90L/Lb 2eL/8b PLLITS BSLi0S B8L/2S BSL/0S ¥L9/8 88S/0F gusise . 7 csreese sess UHL UO,

SWE TS/SNASS

 

sez" gen't 8821 86z'T 8631 goe't ece'l gze't £0b'T ash eug't 409°!

 
 
 

SWEO! [FOL

 
 

0 0 ol 08t 0 0 0 of et oet og 001

   
  

 

 

 
 

 

 
    

 

 

   

 

 
 

. “IPSs
0 0 0 0 a 09 we ae we oe ¥9 ve aaa 8I-SS/6-SS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ve “ESS
0 0 ou ozt a 09 ze zor zz 902 vee 891 anion our Jo ssayounyy
oot oot oot oot oot 001 SL os 9% 0 0 0 vores anlgow (AU 1) V POW OT-X-S8
0 0 og 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 0 0 veeee ss paxtg (AWD ¥ POW OI-X-SS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 09 09 peer eeee sere SESS
ote oe oet 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 cree CARTHY) UO-MOlO} [FS
oF oF ose ose ost os 0 0 0 0 0 ‘ ” (AMT) & POW 6I-SS
0 0 09 091 098 ove oly ose 062 002 og “(AUTIN) V POW 6I-SS
ost o6t 061 061 ost oot 0 0 0 0 0 “(AUIIA) @ POW LI-X-SS
0 0 0 0 0 08 061 o6t ot on or “(AMI ¥ POW LI-X-SS
0 0 0 ou oe 0¥% 062 oe ose oo» oor srs 8/8 POW TSS g
0 0 0 0 ° 0 ° 0 oot oe ol eT POW TSS
+8 a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - “CAUTAD) vO~aorfoy 98207
002 008 pet set gL of 0 0 0 0 0 vere OETA) © POW 81°88
¥ 99 sot got gol 801 801 8h ¥9 9% 0 “(AULAN) @ POW 81-88
0 0 9% we ont ont 26 ¥ 0g 9% ol Te CA DT POW 81-88
0 0 0 0 0 0 at zt at zt a v5 POW 6-88
0 0 0 0 0 0 ¥% ze ozt Bor 222 sree % POW 6-SS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 T POW 6-SS
0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 61 oo s88
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 99 99 99 “PSBH LSS
0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 8p 06 06 10g L-SS

 

 

 

8Eo'T gee‘ SLi't BLI'T 98o'T 8bo'T 192'T 920'T 10s" T g0e'T 6re'T 6ey'T 7 T oul] UO SIZYOUNGT

SAGOl

 

$86t F861 €86r 2861 1861 0861 6161 8261 LL6T 9L61 SL6r SL6T

— qa t
awadPIAL

{(@1yyoug Supnpuy awupsg yog)
BIUTBISUOD [VIBIEITOD IMOYI!A\ SBDIOT YOUNY [BIUeUpUOoIOzU] YIAOG “UBIBA VY Bog

S dL
Page-34
“sequiog Aavay mou v puy ajeiouy oujyoug puy ‘uosig ‘avaq ysoddns 02 pasn
99 Pinoe Yow syodsueit pIpULD QL~TT MOU ey JO IUELIA JoxUM ¥ BUIdojaAep azB sIBIAOG ayI YeYs BoUap|Ad aulos s} B1OyT, -ZaquIOg ¥ 04 perleAuoo 28q Pinos ayei0sys IY ¢
‘SAOqe UMOYS S9040} Jo vorIsodwoo aya JaxI¥ Pinom sIYa ‘OF J] “OOF'Z Jo BurIo9 oywHos88e ays uy popnfouy aq |I1m suayede Vsyr jo AUB j1 MOU 30u OP OM »
“0861 e0yaq aquIywAs au099q JOU [[Jm YO-MOIIO; S-N-SS PFAUTW MAU B BYI BAaTTaq PWOS ¢
worpiuasard jo asva soy sajqei ayr uy pasn vaoq aauy sioyouns] gt ‘ssayoUNY] OZ JO gl AIO PInod NSS Ss]o-q Pow mau ayr IvYr pareunse so] aj YBNOUITY z
“AABN 9y2 JO Waunsedag ‘souady aru]
HLPIU] asuajaq ay7 Jo mara aywusarje’ ayr 10; g alquy, aag ,

  

 

(BAER Jo sorD941q BY puB “Mwy a4r jo rusUNINdag ‘souaByTarU] 16) JMG Jo JoIYD rWINSIssy ay ‘KouDdy owe

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

  
  
 

 

 

 

    

 

 

  

 
  

 

 
 

 
 
 

0 0 0 0 or or or or or 91 or or - “1 'S1UQUNWT WETS 88819-H P -O

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0% of oF og ” Trees se se yaquey, wosig,

0 0 0 0 or or or or of oF oo 99 preteen eeeereeree sees sess sy suazshg 20430

eo ar zor Zor zor Zor zor 59 0 0 0 0 Trrerese sess sss 999s go-ssOllOs 8-N-SS,

oes 0g 0% 009 009 009 009 ols 0th 0Lz 09 or TT" 8 "Gora oloy [BUS /61-SS/LT-X-SS

808 808 28% ee gt ser 801 BL 6S 9% oO 0 Terese ess" s"*dormorfoy 88287 /8 TSS,

ooe't o0e'T vor't 966 846 006 028 zoe bly 96% 09 or eres s91USA ABE PAAUTW [BIOL

ose ose See 008 gat ost 9zT sor sor OFT OF OFT ” “siequog Aavayy

988 98g 988 206 816 586 E68 016 988 208 002 389 7 SNE TS

8ee'T gee'T 882'T 862'T 862'T goe't geet gce'l £0b'T ZIs't eLg'T 2oo't “SWEOr 7

——~ —— pane gz

Fee's Les 66e's oor 'z 16e'z zee 'z zee'e ees vee's vor's B1n'Z sere “s3ptyaa Ausayag Hoy
AWBNBA Y aos0g Jo AieuuNg

se osz 92a 002 Sal Ost Set oor oe os $e 0 ae ieeeniee “ea oug

0 0 0 ° 0 o 0 “0 0 0 or se ae “ uosig

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 g of 08 901 sot ——S re agag

ose ose 92% 002 Sut ost 921 sor sor ovr OFT OFT erase Siaquiog Aavay

988/65 988/69 988/6S 206/09 816/19 ¥86/29 ¥e8/29 016/09 988/89 Z08/9¢ ooa/es BE9/eg Tn  SWEIS/SNESS [BIOL

9e/% 98/% 9e/e gale 9e/% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 “CAMTIN) UO-MON10y 8-N-SS/C Po

8b/F ‘8h/F 8b/P Shi 8b/h Bb/F Shh 0 0 Oo 0 0 ot “1B N-SS/C

Ste caatra Ste ele ae G/L Bells 821/83 821/8 Bells rag? raat ‘ *ONSS/A

96r/el 96T/E1 961/ET 961/er 961/et OOT/IT 9LT/Z0 82/8 821/8 82/8 ete BIL rte — “eu HO

80r/9 all 98/% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 “CAMTA) @ °8387/q pow

S/T psie 06/¢ 9BT/L 9etL ZO/6 Z91/6 ebsle 0 0 0 0 “(AUTA) V a86T/q pow

0 0 0 0 0 0 9 80r/9 291/6 06/S 0 0 TSB NSS/C POW

Ost/st —OBT/St_ = OB T/ST = ost/st = ogtyst. —sogt/st. ~—ogtyet boz/zt OB T/ST Ost/el = Zet/tt oe T/or : UOT NSS/a
Page-35
zener

atte

ele

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 0 0 0 0 0 o, 0 0
Oveist —Oze/oz_— OK /SZ eles = aus /zt = zetlet 96/9 zele o oO: 0
Oo. 0 0 og/s O9T/ot = OFB/ST._—aze/oz = Oze/oz=—gSz/Ot = oLt/TE «atte
° 0 0 0 0 0 0 vo/r Cot/or —osa/st
0 0 0 0 0 oO 0 0 0 ally 52/8 2/8
Sez/6h = Bez/6h «= BE L/6h «= SeL/ek = eL/6¥ ¥Le/TS —-BSL/OS—_aBL/ZS 8SL/0S 29/8 = BBS/9H —GuS/¢h
808'T 808 'T BIa'T 862 'T 8ES'T 8ha'T 8sz'T 862° se‘ ais‘ e2g't 209'T
0 0 09 os 0 0 0 oe oer ot oot oor
° ° 0 0 at 09 ee zl ze 99 +9 ve
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ve
0 0 09 og at 09 ee zor zoe 961 vee 801
ost ogt o8t ost ost oat 08 09 oe 0 0 0
0 0 0 08 09 09 09 09 09 09 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 09 09
on or os 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
coz ost 0g 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9
oF Ory ose 4 ost os 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 09 oot 092 oe ow ove 08 002 os
0 os ost 008 002 oor 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 oor 002 002 oe! 02 ot
0 0 or 09 ort ost 061 098 oe oop oor
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ore, olr
+8. a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
set ger set 821 96 8 0 0 0 0 0
96 set ost 08 ost ogt ost eer +8 ar 0
0 0 0 ° oz oz 08 0% 08 is or
0 0 0 0 0 0 a a a at a
0 0 0 0 0 0 ¥% ze ozt gor zee,
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0
0 0 c ° 0 0 0 0 tO) 0 61
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 99 99
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 8 06
80t'T = goz'tT = ast Ber't = geet gett gait 961" eer't tet abet eer
$861 $861 £861 2861 1861 0861 6261 8261 L261 9261 s26t su6t
— a — — ST — qed I
sBaKpI

028/02 i | oe

 

 

 

“a 1ewg/A
“y UeMgy A
“E/R-BN-SSIA
“TONSA,
“US NOSS/IH

 

 

“uy ug

SW@TS/SNESS

“SINGOI [BOL

“II-Ss.
“'8I-SS/6-SS
“ss

 

aur] jJo steyounyy

“rPHQOW (AU 1) ¥ POW 9I-X-Ss
“POX (AL 1) V POW 91-X-SS
we lee tenet vette eres
(PRAUTW-YN) vo-moito} [eUS
KALA) Yo-mofio) [puUg
“(CAUTA) € POW 6I-Ss
“(AULIN) V POW BI-SS
WAUTA) @ POW 2I-X-SS
(AULA) ¥ POW LI-X-SS
“78/2 POW TI-$s

“1 POW II-8g
MAUTA) Vo-morfoy 98497
“CAMLA) D POW 8I-SS
“(AUIN) Z POW Bt-ss
CE DT POW 8I-sg
“oe POW 68S

“"S POW 6-SS
1 POW 6-SS
Vere gigg
PIBH LSS
UOS LSS

   

 

 

vo siayouney

SWEOL

 

(ay{oug Burpnyouy aveumnsy asag Lavy ‘Awsy ‘yIq)

Siuyensuog [warvijog wnoyrIM sedI0q YOY [BUA

 

9 1dBy,

 

YoosarU] 4lAog sUBIBA VY aos0g aru

 

30
Page-36
“saquiog Kavay mau v puv ajesoue asyyoug puy ‘uosig ‘swag ruoddns 07 pasn

q P[noo YoY “YrodsuBsa pIpUBD gz-T] Mau 9YI Jo IUBIIVA JaxUBI v FUIdooAep asv syaJAog |yr YYI aouaplaa awuos st aay “JaquOG ¥ 01 pazIaAUCD aq PINoD rJwsOUTE SILL y
“UOBIAY [BABN puv aFuvy FuoT wy ssajisvs suodvam Jo WINS ¢

worveyuasesd jo as¥a Jo) sajqui ay UI pasn uaaq savy sioyoUN| gt ‘seyoUNs! QZ 10 gt AJI¥9 PINCD NSS s38[9-q POW mau ayy eyr pareuTasD 1 41 YBROYTTY ¢
“¥ s010g eqvuser[y ‘eaoge "p aIqBL, 01 | 810UI00) UL pareiauINus esoys BY aUIUE 947 ose saBUUYD asayr UI] pazoe[jey SIUaWEPN! BYL 1

 

 

 

  
 

 

  

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

 

       

 

or 91 or 91 gt 91 91 oI ssayounnT VETS SS¥I0-H F *O

0 ot oz sz sz 9% of oe oF og os os serress sey aqua wosig

0 t 08 rd se 1p 9 oF 9g 99 99 99 ay “susarskg 19410

ose, Be ore 282 vee, 98t 291 bs 0 0 0 0 . “¥o- motto] B-N-SS

oo org 019 og o19 o19 o18 08s 49 o2z, 09 ot Yo-mojjoy [I¥US/61-S9/LI-X-SS

808 808 808 808 912, 82% ogt eel +8 ab 0 0 “** Wo-molfo} ABV T/S1-SS

Bost = 96‘T 8 a'T cost = oat = OT. 86 994 vos ze 09 or “'Sa]94aA A194 PPA YIM [FOL

oz ose ove rd 022 or 002 ost o8t out oot ovr “siaquog kavayy

¥e6 ¥e6 Fe8 +86 ¥e6 ¥e6 +86 016 988 zo8 002 880 “swaTs

802" Bost Bet Beat Bes — BhBT SST BEAT sce"! zis) = eag't 409"1 “'SWEOT

zee's = 6's eBE'Z BETZ zEZaHN'Z SS weE'Z SS REE'ZhBE'ZpGH‘ZED'Z Sez “*sajoyaa Kaaanag twiol,
qWYIBA V aiog arsusayy Jo AswUNg

osz 082 $2 002 set ost s2i oot sh os $2 0 a : vo aayyoug

° 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 st of se vo wosig

0 0 st og sh 09 se 06 sor sor sor sot “aveg

osz ose ove oez zz oz 008 061 ot out oot ot **suaquiog Aavoy

vee/zo = FEG/Z9_—HEGIZ] = PEGIZGhEB/ZG Ss wEG/ZD «= FEBIZ9.~=—«O18/09-osg/ss = z0g/9s }~=—s nies «= Baa/Zs* “'SN@IS/SNGSS [8101

9e/% 8e/% ge/% 9e/% 98/6 0 0 0 ° 0 9 0 “MELD UO-mol1O} BN-SS/T POW

8r/b see 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (AMIN) ¥ 286 7/q

0 aut 8r/P 8b/> BHF 8b/F 8b/P 0 0 0 0 0 7 “1 eNeSS/C

atte ante are are aie atte 81/8 21/8 82/8 g2t/s aus zune TE ONS SIA,

S6I/El  GGT/ET —OBT/ET —«GT/ET = GT /ET = OMTITT. «= at /Zt Bat 8o1/8 821/8 auie euye “*8UIL YO.

01/9 aLlt sele 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 : “CAMTAD € P89 1/C pow

s/t 59/8 o6/s gee gets. zou/6 zor/6 vsie 0 0 0 0 “CAMIN) V 8VT/C Pow

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 80/9 z9t/6 os/s 0 ) e8N-SSIC POW,

eL/9 vale, 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 : “AUT @ e80T/q

801/6 Ost/et BOt/FL ogt/or Zu/9 $2/e 0 0 0 0 0 0 “ARIN) ¥ ev Tg

° 0 at o9/s 801/6 gstfel —O8T/ST_—OS/LT_—OBT/ST. = 9ST/eT = wet/tk = oat/or Te BN SSI CT
Page-37
0 0 0 aut o/s 801/6 Ost/el = powizt = ostyst aster gents a . -N-SS/C
Beet Ste eee 0 0 0 0 - 0 0 0 € 1sus/x
werer — Gueiztagejezase/zzalelet~—goz/et ~— 96/9. eeye 0 0 ¥ 1SwS/x
0 0 0 zee ertye Bet/It 882/81 Oze/oz = ggzyot OLI/IT eve “8/89 N-SS8/A
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 erie Oor/or —ovz/st——ozefoz “T-O-N-SS/A
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 aus 52/8 “vie NOSS/II-H
Oss/d¥ —069/9% —O59/9F OB /9¥ —OBG/9¥ —BAu/SF SALISH SOLIS —BsL/OS. «shag ~—BES/BYogUSIGp 7 a “9ul[ YO
1 SANG IS/SNESS
s6e't gee! goe' see" 86e" gee'l = 868" Bee" eet 96 'T els't LONE rr swEOT [BIOL
0 0 9 08 oot 002 oor 0 08 ont ore oor TEX SS/TISS
0 0 0 0 0 at ze 06 06 06 v9 ve ae *"81-SS/6-SS
0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 oe 7 i “Ess
0 0 0 03 oot zz alt 08 ost 092 vor gor ” Ts aur yo sayounwy
09 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 0 Paxd (AW LV POW 91-X-8S
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 09 a “ess
oot 0 0 en) 0 0 ° 0 0 ° MARL) € POW Yo-moljo; [sug
06 006 oe oos coe oor 0 0 0 0 0 “(ABIA) ¥ POW Yo-moltoy pew
0 oct ose oF Olp oF Otr oF ose of og """“CARTA) ¥ POW 6I-SS
0 0 0 oF oot 008 00% 008 Lt 06 or OIA) V POW L-X-SS
0 0 0 0 0 o2t oze ze oer cep 00F a aid POW I1-SS
0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 our oe 1 POW TI-sg
ot 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (AUEW) € POW wo-motfoy aB397
Bz ose oer Ot OL or 0 0 0 0 0 Jar) ¥ POW UO-mojto} a8s7
0 se 86 Bt Be 99% Ol 9st 96 oe 0 “CAUTAD & POW 8I-SS
4 oz 02 0z oz 02 oz 02 02 02 ot Ts CAT) T POW BTSs
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 a a a a aa os ¥ POW 6-Sg
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 oe 06 ost zzz 7°" POW BSS.
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 } “1 POW 6-SS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 BI 6 ggg.
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 09 99 99 “PAV LSS
0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 ° a 06 06 “108 LSS,
868'1 see't geet get Se2'T —eSt‘T = eae" = Boe" «= gtz't = ogea't «= sgge't get Toreeersssss ss aur uo ssaygoune
*WEOr
$861 +861 £861 2861 1861 oget 6261 8261 2261 9261 S261 seer
I I I GUE
aakpiyy

 

  
  

 

      

  

 

 

 

 

 
 

      

 

 

SiULBIISUSD [BIABLOD inoyrim saosog YowNIY [wUsUNUODJAIU] I1A0g ig 910g

2 39eL
Page-38
“H9quOg mau v puv yerouty o1jHoUg puL ‘uosg ‘2vag qoddne o1 posn
94 Pinoo Yoru “aiodsues4 PipuBD 91-1] mou ays Jo quBLIuA JoYUB v BuIdofoAep ore si9[A0g 3 39u3 souapiae eutos s| oxoy, “squiog ¥ o7 parieAUoD aq pind ~ajei0uT8 EYL
oAoqs UHOYs $8040} Jo LOHsodwoo oy sxe P[nOM siya ‘OF JI “QOF'g Jo Hulton oreouBBs oy) Up Papnpouy aq IM swarsks asay3 Jo AUB H MoUy 10 Op aj >

‘aye08 ofFayEsne Jo sso] ya 0) UoH¥jAy eBuNY SuoT opvsuadwon 04 sos1}J0vG e10UI jo qwawAordep our uy ansex oF ATOxH aq P[nom suosIg pu sI¥ag oy Jo LONI
FPUd BABTIEq TY “SOI eiqow-pusy ysya Peovjdes pus 4no peswyd oq pinom siequoq Aavay vosig pus weg oys ‘swao] sazjeeqdue So10} S14) osNBOEq 78Yr aAaq[aq eMZOG ¢
“Wonsiuasosd Jo oeue 20) saiqu oy2 UF posn ueeq easy essyound] gt ‘aeyoUNs| Oz 0 gt Aus¥0 pInod NGSS se¥o-q pow Mou ays rey parewpse sf 44 YBNOUTTY 7
SNGSS FFI-A stous Jo uv opususip or udd siojaog aya rvyr AjoxTUN 4] soAaTIOq “KAUN aya JO wawyseded ‘souesyjeiuy peABN Jo sowsIG ayy

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
    

 

 

 

  

0 0 O o or or or or or ol or or SIBYOUNYT WETS S8¥/0-H Pp -D
ose S4z Ore See 01s Sit OFT Or 08 se of 0 cos erequiog e1yyog

0 0 or 0% td St Se of se oF oh os o i “*"eiayaEy vosig
ose She 08 ss% She 91e 18 Ost Ter tT 16 99 vous s ss yguraqsdg 28430
ago't 0e0'T oco't ogo't 016 OlL o19 019 ozs Oar 09 or 19} I1®8S/61-SS/L1-X-SS

88% 88z 882, 88S 88 922 91 Ost 06 oe 0 0 *WO-MOT[O} 9BIV'T/ BT-Sg
gle‘ gle'l gle'l ster 86r'T 986 028 902 919 Osh 09 or “''s919149A A22A19q POAUTW [¥I0L,
06 06 06 86 oll st sit St Stl set ser OFT 7 “"sraquiog Aavey

988 988 988 988 988 988 988 8l8 988 _ 208 00L 889 1 l SATS
86e'T 86e'T 86e'T 86e'T 86e'T 86e'T 86E'T .  g6e'T 86e'T 96r'T e2s'T coor ot SWI

 

 

 
 

Fle 'S LES Fle's 6Le'% vee‘ 668 'z 6688'S 168% 66E' eer’ 80F'z 1 “S2]1YOA Ksaayeq [HOL

@ e104 jo Aivmung

  
  

 

 
 

0 0 9 0 $I 02 08 08 08 of of se oranl i “uosg
06 06 06 $6 $6 $6 96 $6 $6 sor gl SOT i. anenenennnnennane \.1:6
06 06 08 $6 Orr Sut a sit gut ser ser OFT 74 “ge suaquiog Kasay

 

 

 

988/69 988/65 988/69 988/69 988/6¢ 988/6S 988/6S 828/89 988/89 208/95 oozes sgg/7g

 

“SN ETIS/FNGSS [8201

 

 

 

 

9e/e 98/% 9e/z 9e/e 981s QO 0 0 9 9 0 0 "(AU T) VO-morloy B-N-SS/G POW,
Bhlb Shir Bh/b 0 0 0 0 0 9 O oO 0 "CAM 1) UO-MOT10J B-N-SS/a.
0 0 0 8b/h Bh/h 8b/b Bb/b 0 0 0 0 0 —eao “SN-SS/C
Cre ate atte SUL oil ete arte ete Bes 821/8 ae raaer4 ‘ “"ONSS/A
961/Er 96T/ET 96T/ET 96r/er 96r/er OOT/IT OOT/TT ate Bae 82/8 are ae [ned nd ee a BO
Bete 9BU/L Ose 92t/e UL 801/90 SIE 0 0 0 0 0 7 “(AU 1) YO-molto; B-N-SS/d POW
0 0 0 0 9 eS/e 80r/9 e816 e0t/6 06/s _o 0 Terese" BNSS/C POW
Ost/st O8T/ST O8t/ST BOT/PT 021/01 ZL/9 Fale 0 0 O 0 0 : “(AM VD) Uo-mol[oy 8-N-SS/C

33
Page-39
ro

 

ost/s! = ogtyst = uat/St ——ogtist ogt/st = ogt/st = OBST vou/et ogi/st gstjer a gevior 7 SN-SS/G

  
  

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

          

   

  
   

  

 

zeal ate ele 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 “@ UBUS/A
goz/el  ozesoz = OOW/SZ_aSE/Z]—wuesLI «aT /Zt_ 98/9 zele 0 0 “y UPUS/A
0 0 0 og/s ogt/or —oba/st = ozesoz_—sozeyoz=—s saat LT /IT euie “£189 NSS/A
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 v9/h ost/or —ovz/st_——Oze/0z “TO-N-SS/A
0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 auy vals ve/8 S-N-SS/II-H
oec/es = pests «= BEL/6h «= BELIGY «= BEL/GH = FLLITS §=—BGLJOS.«_zBLIZS = BSL/OS«bLO/Sh BBS/OH = Gus/SH TT . aU BO
. *WETS/*NESS

zoz't = eet 62" zie" zee'teee't eet evel Brel IST est = LOST SWOT [ROL
0 0 08 06 0 0 0 of 08 ozt o9t oot “ess
0 0 0 0 0 ¥% ze eb ze oe ¥9 ve : “ 8T-SS/6-SS
0 0 0 0 0 0 ° 0 ° ° 0 ve a “Ess
° ° 08 06 ° ¥% ae zor zor 96t vee sor verreeesersss sss sce es gutt fjo Ba4OUNTT
ost ogt o8t ogt oat 08 or 0 0 0 0 0 } Doon: (axtie @ POW SI-X-SS
0. 0 0 0 09 08 08 08 oF 0 0 0 : (AU 1) ¥ POW OI-X-8S
08 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 09 0 0 “PPE (AM DV POW OI-X-SS
0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 “ELS
ot out 06 9 ° ° o . 0 0 0 0 (AUT) Yo-morloy [PWS
Oly ory oly oor 002 oor o . 0 0 “0 0 “(AUTA) € POW 61-88
0 0 0 ont ole ore oly ose 062 002 0 CAML) ¥ POW 61-SS
Our oll Or or ot og oO 0 0 0 0 “AUTA) € POW LUX-SS
0 0 0 ° 0 09 ont om ou on or “CAUIA) Y POW L1-X-88
0 oF 06 ost 062 ore ose oly 02h Oey oor 78/8 POW TSS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 oe 02z or TTT POW. TSS
+8 zr 0 0 0 0 0 0 - 0 ° 0 (AMI) vo-mos[oy 2807]
96 get ost zet ze sr ° 0 ° 0 ° (AUT) D POW 8I-SS
0 0 0 8b 80t sot sor 8h ¥o 9% 0 * (ART) @ POW 81-88
26 zs 26 6 26 %6 26 ¥h os 9% or “28 (AMT) T POW 8T°SS
0 0 0 o° 0 0 0 a a a “POW 6-SS
0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 &b ost got 22% "% POW 6-SS.
° ° 0 0 0 0 ° 0 0 0 0 . “1 POW 6-88
0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 él . “8-88
0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 90 99 PISH L-S8
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 06 : “°440$ LSS

 

208't aye'l fata eee" eee'l 863'1 ose't Ove'T ost'T ore't ere'T oer't

 

++ 9uy vo sroyounsy

SWEOl

S86 861 e86t 2861 1861 0861 661 Bl6l 4261 9261 SL6t SLO

a a et

seat pi

S{UPBIISUOD ]BIAIBIIOD IMOYIM SedI0Y YOY [BUaUNUODIaUT I1A0g :- sDI0g

8 GL

at

STEARNS - 2

a

34

‘
Page-40
“daquog Kavay mau v puv ayesours asyyoug pus ‘uosig ‘ivag qoddns 01 pasn
°9 Pinos yaqyas “auodsuxr pips gy-TT Meu ay Jo suEJIVA LOxUE v BUIdojonsp azw syeIA0g ays UY adUapIAd awOS 5} BBY ‘Joquiog ¥ Oru! parsauoo aq pinod awsome sty »
‘AOE UNOUS $90I0} Jo Uo}nIsoduoD ays Jax PInom siya ‘os 5] “OOF'z Jo Suspo0 -oreBasBFe O47 ur pepnjouy oq [[Im suasks asaya jo AUP J! OU 30U OP aM ¢

“WISUING INoYFnosys sayz IBajonu 10 ;wUO;UaAUOD
70} asm 9q Pinos ‘eitHHo¥g 94s 91] “Ay Pus ‘enjeuedse 9q pinom soquiog MAU 8 esnvdaq ‘2o10} auIpYoRg salloUE v UI ansez A[ax"] pInom sequOG Aavay sau v jo waudoldaq ;
“Uolsuiuasard jo eswa J0j sajquy YI UT pasn Uaaq eAvY sIdYoUNyT gT ‘ssayouns] OZ 10 gT A189 PINCD NESE ssB[o-q Pow mau aya 1942 parBUTse st 1 ySnoyily |

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

  

0 0 ° ° or or or or 9I 91 or 91 : JOYOUNRT [VETS S8¥9-H “OD
00% 002 002 00 gut ost $2r oot SL 0s 4 ° — “psequog aujyoug
oF OF OF oF sh os os os os os os os Courses sere see oe ss aque uosig
OF OF Ore Sho 08% ole 16r gor er ell 16 99 efuarsXg 29430
2S 861 zor zor zor Z91 zor bs 0 0 0 0 Yor MOLO} B-N-SS
08t Ost ost Ost 08 Os OF 0 0 0 0 0 “OX-Ss
069 069 O19 ozs as Oss oes 06y 008 Le 09 or WS/6I-SS/LI-X°SS
ost 08t Ost o8t 08T ost sor BL ¥e 9% 0 o 7 UO-MO[0} O80 T/81-SS
z0e'T 8h 'T cert Zy0'L 286 816 088 29 vSh 963 09 or “*sajyaa As2an9qd PRANIW [SOL
081 $41 oot Ser OF ovr OFT Opt OFL ort ovr Ov1 “siaquiog away
268 026 +86 Fee 4E6 ¥e6 vee O16 988 08 002 880 “SWE TS
208'T are'T 262'T ote't see'l ae't Beet ovE'l Bre'l aIg'T ele‘ 209'T ““SWaOl

 

 

88'S ege's o8e's 16'S 968' 968'Z 9268'S 26E'S yle'S iad Stb's sere “S914 Azeayag [801

: Q eo10g jo <avmung

  

 
 

oot se so SF of $I 0 0 0 Oo 0 0 “saquiog Savoy wan,

0 0 0 0 g rd se se se se se se peers cee sgosig

08 06 $6 00T SOT sor sor - sor sor sou sor gor ve awog

08t gut 081 Shr ovr OFT OF OFL OFL OFT OFT OFT ” —) I “a eequog Kavexy
~

 

 
 

266/S9 026/49 ¥E6/29 ¥E6/29 ¥£6/29 486/29 PE6/Z9 016/09 988/85 208/99 oozes 889/Z¢ “SWE TS/SNGSS 1201,

9/2 9e/e ele 9e/e 9e/e 0 0 0 0 0 0 ° CAML) Yo-moiloy g-N-SS/C POW

 
 
  

 

Shir Shh abl Shih 8b/F - 8hlh 8b/> 0 0 0 0 0 “SN-SS/C
ae are ate aule aie ote 8oU/8 82/8 82/8 82/8 eile Sie . "| 7 “Oe NOSS/A
96T/EL 96t/et eet /Et 961/ET o6t/er OOT/IT Luar 82T/8 82/8 Bos casera atte 7 3U HO.

 
 

 
 

06/s 98/e 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 “ CAMTA) g e827 /8881Q WON
80l/e aLly Bele 0 Qo 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Th CAMTAD) @ 8B1NT/q pow
sit vole 06/¢ BZI/L OT/L Z9l/6 Z91/6 vit 0 0 0 0 TATA) V 8B18T/C POW
0 0 0 0 0 0 oO 80l/9 291/68 06/¢ 0 0 eres ess esses" SNSS/C POW

35

—hac_Lu0ace.:
Page-41
APPENDIX

COLLATERAL CONSTRAINTS

66. Several collateral constraints have been con-
sidered by the US for inclusion in a SALT agree-
ment as a means of monitoring compliance with the
MIRV limitation. These constraints, by their very
nature, would preclude, inhibit, or alter certain
Soviet programs.

67. For example, one constraint requires that a
missile booster flight-tested as a MIRVed missile
be counted as MIRVed when deployed, even if a
single-RV version of the missile has been developed.
This would put both the single-RV and MIRV
variants of the SS-18 within the MIRV aggregate.
It would, therefore, discourage Soviet development
of future systems with this deployment flexibility.
Another constraint requires counting under the

MIRV limit all SLBM launchers on a submarine if
any SLBM launchers on submarines of the same
class are MIRVed. In the absence of this constraint,
the Soviets might opt for deploying MIRVed mis-
siles on only some D-class submarines in order
to emphasize MIRVed ICBM deployment.

68. Because of the uncertainty over the nego-
tiability of collateral constraints, our force pro-
jections assume that no collateral constraints are in
effect. Table 9, however, lists those constraints
which would have a significant impact on Soviet
deployment options, and Table 10 shows how our
Force projections for 1985 would differ if all such
constraints are agreed to.

Table 9

Possible Affects of Collateral Constraints on Soviet Force Developments

 

Constraint

Count under the MIRV limit all
launchers at an ICBM complex if
any launchers at the complex are

MIRVed. siles.

Count under the MIRV limit all
SLBM launchers on a submarine if
any SLBM launchers on submarines
of the same class are MIRVed.

An ICBM or SLBM booster of a type
flight-tested as a MIRVed missile
will be counted as MIRVed when

Would probably deploy MIRVed
missiles on all D-class SSBNs, or
not deploy any MIRVed SLBMs.

Would deploy only the
variant of the SS-18,

Possible Actions by the Soviets . . .
. +. With the Constraint

..- Without the Constraint

Would deploy MIR Ved missiles in all Might deploy MIRVed missiles in only
launchers at the complexes selected
for deployment of MIRVed mis-

@ portion of the launchers at each
complex. They might do this if they
wanted to reach the 1,320 limit
exactly, retain all existing ICBM
complexes, or simplify cheating on
the agreement,

Might opt for deploying MIRVed
SLBMs only on part of the D-class
force and concentrate on MIRVing
more ICBMs.

MIRV_ Might deploy both the single-RV SS-18

and the MIRVed SS-18. They might

also develop and deploy an SS-X-17/

 

 

Cp. 8¢ blanks

deployed, even if a single-RV SS-19 follow-on payload in the 1980s
version of the booster has also been with both single-RV and MIRV
developed. configurations for deployment at the
SS-11 Mod 3 complexes,
37
~“FES-S80068-Z5- Fop-—Seeret
Page-42
Tep—Seeret*

 

Table 10

Comparison of 1985 Levels From Illustrative Projections of Soviet Forces
(Figures for MI RVed missiles are shown in italic type)

 
 

   

Force B
Emphasis on Emphasis on
ICBMs Mobility

 

 

With = Without. = With = Without = With

 

   

  

 

 

  

 

Without Constraints Con- Con- Con- Con- Con-
Best Estimate !? straints? straints straints straints straints
ICBMs

SS-9......... Pa 0 O 30 0 96
SS-18 (IRV)... eee 0 20 0 92 0
SS-18 (MIRV), Large A/B.. 308 288 278 180 174
SS-11 Mod 2/3 : 0 0 0 0 0
SS-X-17. 190 oO 9 110
‘SS-19 an a 410 0 0 410
Small follow-on (MIRV)......2.... 0 1,080 ~—*1,080 0
Small follow-on (not MIRVed). 290 0 0 220
SS-X-16 Fixed.. 60 60 60 0
SS8-X-16 Mobile. 100 0 0 170
Poth 1,33 1,180

    

  

  

    

Deactivated
SS-9. 0 (0) 0 0 0 36 38
SS-11. 7 on 140 (200) 140 0 0 340 290
BBB ee — 0 (0) 0 0 0 0 60
SSBNs/SLBMs
Y/SS-N-6, Small follow-on..............-. 34/544 (34/544) 34/544 31/496 31/496 32/512 32/512
D, Mod D/SS-N-8............... - 19/228 (0) 0 28/390 28/390 19/228
D, Mod D/SS-N-8, Large A/B (MIRV) 91162 (28/390) 281390 0 oO 91162
New Class/Large AIB (MIRV).. 0 0) 0 0 o 5190

Total. .... siceseceeees 62/933 (62/934)

62/934 -5Y!88G 59/886 «65/992

 

Deactivated

 

 

 

VISS-N-6§ an weeee 0 (0) 0 348 3/48 2/32
Bombers
Bear and Bison. ope 90 (88) 90 90 90 80 80
New Bomber Foeehaa! o 0 (0) 0 0 0 110 110
Total. . 90 190 * 190
Deactivated 50 (52) 50 60 60

 

Total Delivery Vehicles (2,400) 2,374 2,384

   

Total MIRVed Delivery Vehicles

 
    

 

1 Figures in parentheses represent force strengths projected by the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Army, and the Navy (see
‘Table 4)

2See also Tables 5 and 6 for variants of Force A which include Backfire bombers.

2 Collateral constraints would require that all 308 SS-18s and all 390 D-class launchers he counted as MIRVed. This would keep
the Soviets from deploying a new small follow-on with MIRVs in the SS-I1 Mod 2/3 silos.

+ Collateral constraints would have little impact on this Force, although the Soviets would have to retain a few SS-9s and
refrain from deploying 20 SS-I8s with a single RY

5 Collateral constraints would oblige the Soviets to retain SS-9 launchers in lieu of deploying SS-18s with a single RV. They
would also preclude the deployment of the single-RV variant of the -16 while deploying a mobile SS-X-16 with MIRVs;
for this reason, it is projected that the Soviets would forgo deploying the SS-X-16 in silos.

© See footnote 4 at paragcaph 45 for comment of the Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy.

 

 

38
Page-43
