
Page-24
NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE
ESTIMATE

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

Soviet Foreign Policies and the
Outlook for Soviet-American Relations

SEGRE

NIE 11-72
20 April 1972

Ne 288
Page-25
SECRET

THIS ESTIMATE IS SUBMITTED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL '
INTELLIGENCE AND CONCURRED IN BY THE UNITED STATES
INTELLIGENCE BOARD.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the Preparation of
the estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

The Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Tl
The Director, National Security Agency
1

st

e Acting Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Zz

1e Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Commission

Abstaining:

The Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Special Assistant
to the Secretary of the Treasury, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

  
  
  
  

This material contains information affecting#he National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage Ig, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
jon or revelation of which in aymanner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

 

 

Fr declassificction
Page-26
NIE 11-72

SOVIET FOREIGN POLICIES
AND THE OUTLOOK FOR
SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS
Page-27
CONTENTS

Page
SUMMARY 1
DISCUSSION - an 9

I. THE USSR’S INTERNATIONAL POSITION: PURPOSES AND
PERCEPTIONS .

IL INTERNAL FACTORS BEARING ON SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY .. 12

The State of the Leadership : 12
Economic Strengths and Weaknesses 13
Internal Dissent : 4

II. MAJOR ISSUES AND OPTIONS IN SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY 15

The Strategic Weapons Relationship With the United States 15
China: The USSR’s Second Front : ... 17
Détente in Europe ... 20
Soviet Involvement in the Middle East i 25
The Soviets and the Third World : - 26

IV. THE FUTURE SETTING OF SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS 28

Longer-Term Prospects 30

ANNEX
Page-28
SOVIET FOREIGN POLICIES
AND THE OUTLOOK FOR
SOVIET-AMERICAN RELATIONS

SUMMARY

The USSR’s View of Its World Position

A. Developments of recent years have given the USSR increased
confidence in its security and strategic posture, in its capacity to en-
age its adversaries on favorable terms, and in the prospects for the
long-term growth of its international influence. The Soviets have thus
begun to pursue a more vigorous foreign policy and to accept deeper
involvement in many world areas.

B. The attainment of rough parity in strategic weapons with the
US has contributed more than anything else to the USSR’s self-confi-
dence. The Soviets have also been encouraged to see the US suffering
a loss of influence in certain areas, facing economic difficulties at home
and abroad, and coming under domestic pressure to curtail its world
role. Largely on the basis of these considerations, Moscow believes
that the US no longer enjoys a clear international predominance. It
does not appear to have concluded, however, that US power has be-
gun a precipitate or permanent decline; US economic, military, and
technological capabilities continue to impress the Soviets. Thus, while
they may be tempted to conclude that the US will no longer be the
competitor it once was and may therefore be inclined as opportunities

seffe
Page-29
SEQRET

occur to use their greater strength and flexibility more venturesomely,
they can still see themselves getting into serious difficulties with the
US if they press too hard.

C. The China problem is another factor which limits Soviet confi-
dence. It has become increasingly Clear to the Russians that China is
capable of seriously undermining their international positions, keeping
them off balance ideologically, and in the longer term, constituting a
serious strategic threat. It unquestionably concerns the Soviets that
China’s ability to challenge them in all these ways would be all the
greater in circumstances of Sino-American rapprochement.

Domestic Political and Economic Factors

D. The present Soviet leadership has been notable for its stability,
and this has resulted in continuity in the decision-making process dur-
ing most of the seven years since Khrushchev’s overthrow. Brezhnev
has clearly emerged as the principal figure in the regime and has been
taking a vigorous lead in the area of foreign policy; he now has a per-
sonal stake in the USSR’s current policy of selective détente, Decision-
making, however, remains a collective process. Indeed, there are occa-
sional signs of stress over the content and implementation of foreign
policy. And maintaining a consensus behind a more active Soviet for-
eign policy, in circumstances of greater international complexity, may
become increasingly difficult over time.

E. The USSR has been able to achieve rates of economic growth
which are high by international standards and to maintain a military
effort roughly equal to that of the US. But the Soviet economy is still
backward in some sectors and it faces serious problems stemming
from low productivity, the declining effectiveness of investment, and
technological lag. Economic constraints do not oblige the Soviets to
reduce military spending, however. While an agreement on strategic
arms control would relieve somewhat the heavy demands which mili-
tary programs impose on high quality human and material resources,
agreements of the sort now contemplated would not enable the So-
viets to increase the rate of economic growth appreciably.

The Strategic Weapons Relationship with the United States

F. We believe that the USSR has concluded that the attainment
of clear superiority in strategic weapons—i.e., a superiority so evident

sefler
Page-30
that the Soviets could be assured of success in a confrontation and even
“win” should they press the issue to nuclear war, say, by a first strike—
is not now feasible. Nevertheless, there are no doubt those in Moscow
who believe that it may still be possible to obtain a meaningful margin
of advantage in strategic weapons which would give the USSR in-
creased political-psychological leverage. The Soviet leaders must, at
the same time, reckon with the possibility that any attempt to gain
such an advantage would look to the US much the same as an attempt
to moye toward clear superiority and would produce the same counter-
action. The course they have chosen, at least for the immediate future,
is to attempt to stabilize some aspects of the strategic relationship
with the US through negotiations, and they appear to believe that a
formal antiballistic missile agreement and an interim freeze on some
strategic offensive systems, on terms they can accept, are within reach.

G. Assuming such an agreement is reached, the Soviets would
continue serious negotiations on more comprehensive limitations, But
the Soviet leaders are probably not clear in their own minds as to
where these negotiations should lead, They may fear that too com-
prehensive an agreement might involve disadvantages they could not
anticipate or foreclose developments which might eventually improve
their relative position. And the more complex the agreement being
considered, the greater the difficulties the Soviet leaders would face
in working out a bureaucratic consensus. Thus, their approach to
further negotiations would almost insure that these would be pro-
tracted.

The Sino-Soviet Conflict

H. The Soviets understand that their difficulties with China are |

in many ways more urgent and more intractable than their difficulties
with the US and that, as Chinese military power grows, the conflict
may become more dangerous. Moscow no doubt expects that the
approach to normalization in US-Chinese relations will strengthen
Peking’s international position and will make China even more un-

‘For separate statements of the views of Lt. Gen, Jammie M. Philpott, Acting Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency; Vice Adm. Noel Gayler, Director, National Security Agency;
Rear Adin, Earl F. Rectanus, Director of Naval Intelligence, Department. of the Navy; and
Maj. Gen. George J. Keewan, Jr., Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, see their footnotes

to paragraph 28, page 16.
ofr

 

 

a

&
Page-31
sefha

willing than before to consider concessions to the USSR. It has also
occurred to the Soviets that the US may gain some increased freedom
of maneuver against them and that Washington and Peking will in
some situations follow parallel policies to Moscow’s detriment. The
new US-Chinese relationship could, in addition, make a military solu-
tion to the Sino-Soviet conflict seem to the Soviets an even less attrac-
tive alternative than before.

I. Sino-Soviet relations will not necessarily remain as bad as they are
now. At some point, the two sides might arrive at a modus vivendi
which would permit them to “coexist” more or less normally, But to
obtain any deep and lasting accommodation the Russians would have
to pay a price they would consider unacceptably high, including a
lifting of military pressures, some territorial concessions, disavowal
of Moscow’s pretensions as the paramount authority among Com-
munists, and acknowledgement of a Chinese sphere of influence in
Asia.

J. The Russians are likely to want to establish a wider role in Asia
in the next few years. Consolidation of the Soviet position in South
Asia, with the focus on India, will be one feature of this effort. The
Russians will also continue to work to prevent an increase in Chinese
influence in North Korea and North Vietnam. In the case of the latter,
this will mean that Moscow will remain staunch in its support of
Hanoi’s effort to obtain a favorable settlement of the Vietnam war.
The Soviets will, as a further objective of their policy in Asia, try to
increase their influence in Japan, and an improvement in relations
has already begun. Soviet prospects in this regard are, however, prob-
ably limited by Tokyo’s greater concern for its relations with the US
and China.

Soviet Policy in Eastern and Western Europe

K. Although Moscow has made progress in restoring order in
Eastern Europe, it has not come to grips with the root causes which
have in recent years produced unrest or even defiance of Soviet au-
thority there—in Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. Many East
European leaders still hope for greater national autonomy and wider
political and economic intercourse with the West. The USSR’s task
of reconciling its efforts to consolidate its hegemony in Eastern Europe

whe
Page-32
sf

with an active policy of détente in Western Europe can therefore only
be complicated and delicate. If it came to a choice between erosion of
their position in Eastern Europe and détente in Europe as a whole,
the Soviets would choose to let the latter suffer.

 

L. The USSR’s security concerns in Eastern Europe, its own eco-
nomic weaknesses, and growing preoccupation with the Chinese have
turned it away from a policy of crisis and confrontation in Europe.
At the same time, the changing pattern of US-West European rela-
tionships and trends within Western Europe itself have evidently
convinced Moscow that its long-standing European aims—including
a reduction of the US role and influence there—have become more
realizable than ever before. A conference on European security repre-
sents for Moscow one way of encouraging the favorable trends in
Western Europe and slowing the adverse ones. The Soviets also hope
that a conference would open the way to a definitive and formal
acknowledgement of the status quo in Germany and Eastern Europe.
Rejection of the West German-Soviet treaty by the West German
Bundestag would deal a setback to Soviet confidence in the viability
of its German policy and possibly of its wider European policy. We
believe, however, that in these circumstances Moscow’s inclination
would still be, perhaps after an interval of threatening talk, to try
to salvage as much as possible of these policies rather than to reverse
course completely.

M. The USSR’s position on force reductions in Europe appears
to stem mainly from its overall European tactics rather than from
economic pressures or from military requirements related to the Sino-
Soviet border. Moscow has doubts about the desirability of reducing
its forces because of its concerns about Eastern Europe and about
its military position vis-a-vis NATO. We believe, nevertheless, that
Moscow is coming to accept that, assuming continuation of present
trends in East-West relations in Europe, it could safely withdraw
some of its forces from Eastern Europe, particularly from the large
contingent in East Germany. This does not mean the Soviets have
decided on any reduction or soon will. But, if they should decide to
move beyond their present position, they will presumably see ad-
vantage in thoroughly exploring the possibilities of a negotiated agree-
ment rather than acting unilaterally. On the other hand, if they should
Page-33
conclude that such negotiations are unpromising, they might make
limited withdrawals on their own, mainly because they would judge
that this would lead to more significant US withdrawals.

The USSR‘s Position in the Middle East

N. In order to protect their close political and military ties with
Egypt, the Soviets have been willing to increase their direct involve-
ment and to accept larger risks in the context of the Arab-Israeli con-
flict. A full-scale renewal of the Arab-Israeli war would, however, be
unwelcome to the Russians and the present situation causes them
some anxiety. There is thus some chance that Moscow will come to
see the desirability of urging the Arabs to accept a limited, interim
agreement which would diminish the dangers of renewed hostilities,
while still allowing the Soviets to enjoy the fruits of continued Arab-
Israeli animosity. The Soviets are, however, unlikely to be amenable
to an explicit understanding with the US limiting the flow of arms
to the Middle East, though they might see advantage in some tacit
restraints.

O. The Russians are probably generally optimistic about their
long-term prospects in the Middle East, believing that radical, anti-
Western forces there will assure them a continuing role of influence
and eventually an even larger one. Bui the Soviets are uncomfortable
because their present position is tied so closely to the exigencies of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. They have also seen that radical nationalism
can occasionally take a violently anti-Russian turn and with increasing
involvement they will probably encounter greater difficulty in follow-
ing a coherent and even-handed policy among the diverse and quarrel-
some states of the area. In order to put their position in the Middle
East on a firmer foundation for the future, they are likely to try both
to forge stronger political ties with the “progressive” Arab parties and
to develop their diplomatic relations with the moderate Arab states.

The Third World

P. The USSR’s policies in the Third World are greatly affected by
its urge to claim a wider world role for itself and by the need to pro-
tect its revolutionary credentials, especially against the Chinese chal-
lenge. In addition to its strong position in the Middle East, the USSR

shar
Page-34
sof:

has over the years won for itself a pivotal role in South Asia. It has
also gained wider influence in Latin America. In Africa, the Soviet
record is considerably more mixed and Soviet activities there now
have a relatively low priority. In the Third World as a whole, partly
because of some serious setbacks in the past, the Soviets are now in-
clined to view their Prospects somewhat more soberly than they once
did. Their approach is in general characterized by opportunism and
a regard for regional differentiation, Nevertheless, by virtue of its

- acquisition in recent years of a greater capability to use its military
forces in distant areas—a capability which is likely to continue to
grow—Moscow may now believe its options in the Third World are
expanding.

Future Soviet-American Relations

Q. The USSR has compelling reasons for wanting to keep its rela-
tions with the US in reasonably good repair, if only in order to control
the risks arising from the rivalry and tensions which Moscow assumes
will continue. It realizes that the larger world role it seeks is un-
realizable except at the expense of the US. Whether the USSR will in
particular circumstances lean toward sharper competition or broader
cooperation with the US will naturally depend on the interaction of
many variables. Crucial among these will be Moscow’s appraisal of US
intentions and its assessment of developments in the triangular relation-
ship involving the US, China, and itself.

R. Progress in talks on strategic arms limitations might, by but-
tressing the USSR’s sense of security, help to wear away some of its
suspicion of US intentions. But problems in other areas where the
political interests of the two countries are deeply engaged may prove
to be of a more intractable sort. The conflict of interests in the Middle
East seems likely to be prolonged. This may be true also in Europe
where the Russians have an interest in the kinds of agreements which
contribute to the security of the Soviet sphere but not in a genuine
European settlement.

S. Whether the future will bring a more meaningful modification
of the Soviet international outlook seems likely to depend ultimately
on the USSR’s internal evolution. And here the crucial question may
be how the Soviet leaders deal with the problem of adaptive change in

shes
Page-35
suger

Soviet society, including the problem of economic modernization: by
minimal measures or by serious reform. The entrenched bureaucratic
oligarchy now in charge is resistant to change. Among the younger
men in the Politburo who now seem most likely to take over from the
aging top leadership there may be some who harbor reformist views,
But such tendencies, if they exist, are not now in evidence.

T. Thus, for the foreseeable future at any rate, Soviet policy, for
reasons deeply rooted in the ideology of the regime and the world
power ambitions of its leaders, will remain antagonistic to the West,
and especially to the US. The gains the Soviets have made in relative
military power, together with the heightened confidence these gains
have inspired, will lead them to press their challenge to Western inter-
ests with increasing vigor and may in some situations lead them to
assume greater risks than they have previously. At the same time, their
policies will remain flexible, since they realize that in some areas their
aims may be better advanced by policies of détente than by policies
of pressure. They will remain conscious of the great and sometimes
uncontrollable risks which their global aims could generate unless
their policies are modulated by a certain prudence in particular
situations.
Page-36
DISCUSSION

|. THE USSR’S INTERNATIONAL
POSITION: PURPOSES AND
PERCEPTIONS

1. The underlying premises of Soviet foreign
policy remain intact despite the changes which
have affected Soviet society in the postwar
period and despite the dramatic developments
in the world situation during these years. The
Soviet leaders continue to conceive of them-
selves as being in the service of Marxist-
Leninist ideology and its promise of eventual
suecess for Communism. And, while this body
of doctrine does not prescribe particular ac-
tions in specific situations, it creates a set of
mind which sometimes distorts the perception
of the Soviet policy-makers, tends to set limits
on how far and how fast they can go in modify-
ing established positions, and represents a
constant factor in internal party politics. These
preconceptions argue that a fundamental re-
conciliation of interests between the USSR
and the US is impossible and that an eventual
convergence of political, economic and social
systems is out of the question. Conflict in some

 

 

form is seen as a permanent feature of the
relationship, and Moscow assumes that the
governing motive on each side is to gain
ascendancy over the other. This means that
the USSR is committed to efforts to magnify
its relative power in a variety of ways. Yet,
since the Soviet leaders consider the outcome
of the enduring struggle to be foreordained
in favor of Communism, they can also find
justification in their ideology for a policy of
gradualism and low risk.

2. While the USSR’s international behavior
in practice owes more to pragmatic considera-
tions of national interest than to revolutionary
goals, for the Soviet leaders to acknowledge
that this is so would be to raise questions
about the legitimacy of their own rule and to
lend credibility to Chinese charges of betrayal.
This helps to explain why the Russians con-
tinue to chase the illusion of international
Communist unity and to struggle against the
tide of growing Communist diversity even
while they incline increasingly to the use of
instruments other than Communist Parties in
their efforts to gain wider influence abroad.
Page-37
SE@RET

3. Although Soviet foreign policy in the
mid-1960s often seemed to be marked by un-
certainty, defensiveness, and a degree of im-
mobility, in more recent years it has gradually
acquired a new confidence and ambition. The
earlier lack of confidence had several causes:
the Cuban missile crisis had been a stinging
political and psychological defeat widely
viewed as evidence of Sovict inferiority to
the US in strategic and conventional military
power; the Soviet economy showed signs of
being in serious trouble; after Khrushchev’s
overthrow the reconstituted Soviet Politburo
underwent a lengthy period of shake-down;
the 1967 war in the Middle East and its after.
math had confronted the USSR with unfore-
seen risks and costs; tension with China grew
and finally erupted into sharp fighting on the
border; and, in Eastern Europe, the Soviets
felt threatened by developments in Romania
and Czechoslovakia.

4. By the end of the decade, however, these
difficulties must have seemed, from Moscow’s
vantage point, to have been overcome or at
least made manageable and the Soviet posi-
tion made markedly stronger in many areas.
This has made possible a more active and
more confident pursuit of fundamental foreign
policy aims: to secure the USSR’s strategic
Position and its land frontiers; to reinforce
Soviet domination in Eastern Europe; and,
to enlarge the USSR’s world role,

5. At the beginning of the 1970s, the Rus-
sians see themselves as having at last made
the grade as a superpower and believe them-
selves entitled to all the rights and privileges
of that estate. Taking into account the vari-
ous political, military and economic factors by
which it reckons international power, Mos-
cow believes that the US no longer enjoys a
clear predominance. The attainment of rough
Parity in strategic weapons with the US has
contributed more than anything else to the

 

USSR’s sense of having arrived. The USSR
does not see itself as enjoying equality with
the US in such matters as alliances or basing
arrangements for its forces, but the Russians
have begun to move in a variety of ways to
establish their claims to equality with the US
on a global scale. They have expanded their
diplomatic ties around the world and have
acquired conventional military strength which
enables them to project military power into
distant areas. And, while the USSR stands
outside the international financial structure,
its economic development has enabled it to
open up wider political connections through
trade and economic aid, and, especially in
some areas, through an active program of
military assistance.

6. The Russians have, at the same time,
been encouraged by developments affecting
the US position, for, despite their anxieties
about the Chinese, they see the US as their
only peer in strategic military power and as
the main obstacle to the spread of their in-
fluence in many parts of the world, There-
fore, it has given their confidence a boost to
observe the US in recent years suffering a
loss of influence in certain areas, facing social
problems at home and economic difficulties
at home and abroad, and coming under do-
mestic pressure to curtail its world role,

7. Yet, we do not find either in what the
Soviets say or in their behavior evidence that
they have concluded to their satisfaction that
US power has begun a precipitate or perma-
nent decline. Such judgments as they have
reached seem instead to be highly tentative.
There is evidence that they expect the US
economy to recover from its recent difficulties.
They have a healthy respect for US military
power and are frankly envious of US tech-
nological capabilities and management tech-
niques. They appear to recognize also that
while the central role of the US in the inter-
Page-38
fe

national economic system can be a vulner-
ability, it is a source of great political power
and influence as well.

8. There are, moreover, many things about
the American condition and US policy which
are perplexing to the Russians.? Much as they
would like to believe that discord within the
US in recent years is explicable in standard
Marxist terms of class conflict and thus ‘ex-
ploitable, they see that matters are not so
simple and that few of the US’ dissidents are
susceptible to Moscow’s influence. They are
also troubled by the unpredictability, the zig-
zags as they say, of US foreign policy, and
they suspect that the official US attitude to-
ward them is basically more unfriendly than it
was a few years ago. They recognize that the
US is moving to free itself of the heaviest bur-
dens of the Vietnam war and may suspect that
the US will on that account be in a position
to contest them more vigorously in other
areas, Thus, while the Soviets may be tempted
to conclude that the US will no longer be
ready to engage them in the same ways and
on the same scale as previously, and they
may be inclined as opportunities occur to use
their greater strength and flexibility more ven-
turesomely, they can still see themselves get-
ting into serious difficulties with the US if
they press too hard.

9. Despite the fact that the Soviets con-
tinue to maintain a strong military position in
Central Europe, they do not now regard
NATO as an imminent military threat and
they believe that circumstances in Europe
are favorable to the advancement of long-
sought goals: the consolidation of their se-
curity and ideological buffer zone in Eastern

* There are some signs that high levels in Moscow
have during the last few years begun to feel handi-
capped by ignorance about the US. Attempts are
being made to develop more sophisticated American
studies, most notably in the Institute of the USA
under Georgy Arbatov.

Europe; the reduction of the US presence in
Western Europe; and the containment of
Germany as a power in Europe. The reactiva-
tion of Soviet détente diplomacy in Europe
in the aftermath of Czechoslovakia recom-
mended itself to Moscow both as a step to-
wards stabilization in Eastern Europe and a
means of winning influence in Western Eu-
rope at the expense of the US position there.
But this policy, closely interacting with West
Germany’s Ostpolitik, has required Moscow
to make certain concessions, as in Berlin, and
to relax its hostility toward West German
“revanchism”.

10. China casts a shadow across the whole’
spectrum of Soviet policy. Though the Sino-
Soviet border has been free of major inci-|
dent since 1969, it has become increasingly!
clear to the Russians that China is capable of|
seriously undermining their international po-'
sitions, keeping them off balance ideologi-!
cally, and in the longer term, constituting a;
strategic nuclear threat. It unquestionably
concerns the Soviets that China’s ability to
challenge them in all these ways would be
all the greater in circumstances of Sino-
American rapprochement. {l-

ll. In surveying the international scene,
Moscow thus sees much to justify confidence
in its security and strategic posture, in its
capacity to engage its adversaries on favor-
able terms in many areas and by various means,
and in the prospects for the long-term growth
of the USSR’s international influence. It is no
doubt largely on the strength of such an ap-
preciation that the Soviets have in recent years
begun to pursue a more activist foreign policy
and to accept deeper involvement in many
areas abroad. But the Soviet leaders, inher-
ently conservative, also see much in this en-
vironment which is unfamiliar, unsettling, and
potentially a drain on their resources. Con-
siderations like these dispose them to proceed
with some care.

ET |
Page-39
I INTERNAL FACTORS BEARING ON
SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY

The State of the Leadership

12. Though the standing of some leading
figures has changed, the ranks of the Soviet
collective leadership as a whole have remained
remarkably stable for the past seven years, as
though immune to the corrosive effects of
political struggle and the toll of age. The con-

sequence of this stability has been continuity .

in the decision-making process, a fair degree
of steadiness in the execution of policy, and
a tendency toward incremental changes in
policy rather than abrupt shifts.

13. The Soviet leaders are probably con-
vinced that this stability has served them well.
And it has, indeed, helped them to put their
house in better order after the disarray of
Khrushchev’s last years: by checking the de-
cline in the rate of growth of industrial and
agricultural output; by restoring a sense of
continuity and security to the Party and gov-
ernment bureaucracies; and by establishing an
equilibrium of sorts among the key political
interest groups.

14. However, these accomplishments have
had a price. One cost of stability has been a
delay in the renewal of the leadership. Testify-
ing to this is the fact that the average age
of the 15 full members of the Politburo is 61.6,
with Brezhnev and Kirilenko 65, Kosygin 68,
and Podgomy and Suslov 69. It would be futile
to attempt to predict when and how these men
will end their political careers, but that some
or all of the most senior leaders will have
done so within the next five years, if only for
reasons of age or health, is a near certainty.
The changeover, whatever it causes, might
upset the carefully constructed balance within
the leadership and give rise to an intensifica-
tion of political conflict in which the posing
of alternative policies might figure.

15. With the re-establishment of consensual
politics, Soviet foreign policy in the years im-

RET

mediately after Khrushchev’s removal became
less eccentric and less reckless; it also lost
something in dynamism and inventiveness. An
inevitable concomitant of rule by committee
was a certain slowness of response and flatness
of style which gave this Soviet leadership a
reputation for mediocrity and unimaginative-
ness. This picture has changed considerably in
recent years. Brezhnev has emerged publicly
during the past two or three years as the lead-
ing figure in the Politburo and the principal
exponent of policy. This development has
probably had something to do with the rein-
vigoration of Soviet foreign policy. But deci-
sion-making at the top is still unquestionably a
collective process. It needs to be observed,
moreover, that Brezhnev holds his position not
by right but on the basis of the support of
his fellow oligarchs in the Politburo and that
the withdrawal of this support, as in the case
of Khrushchev, would almost certainly mean
his downfall.

16. Brezhnev’s present pre-eminence is
therefore both a strength and a vulnerability.
Because so much is concealed in Kremlin poli-
tics, it is impossible to say with confidence
what the present balance of his strengths and
weaknesses is. It does appear, however, that
on major issues of policy he must still work
for a consensus. It is nonetheless clear that
his personal prestige is linked to the success
of the USSR’s current policy of détente with
the West and we believe it will be important
to him politically that the forthcoming US-
Soviet summit give evidence that this policy
is yielding results.

17. Certainly, there is general agreement
within the Politburo on the main lines of So-
viet foreign policy and acceptance that this
must be defined by the principle of “peaceful
coexistence”, which sets outer limits to the
conflict with the West. Yet, clearly there can
be contention about the specific ingredients of
such a policy and personal frictions are bound

12 wher
Page-40
he

to arise over the execution of policy. Signs
that this is indeed the case appear from time
to time and it may be that maintaining a con-
sensus behind a more active Soviet policy,
in circumstances of greater international com.
plexity, will prove increasingly difficult. The
USSR’s German policy seems likely to remain
a sensitive issue in internal politics, and any
policy which gave Western influences mean-
ingful access to Soviet people would arouse
misgivings, especially among Party bureau-
crats and security officials who have made
careers of sealing off the Soviet population
from alien influences.

18. Policy with respect to arms negotiations
and the deployment of Soviet forces abroad
especially engage the concerns of the Soviet
military. Within the military there have no
doubt been and may still be reservations about
strategic arms limitation talks (SALT), and on
questions of weapons policy its collective in-
stinct will be to press for maintaining the
momentum of growth. Soviet political leaders
have recognized the military as an important
interest group and evidently consult closely
with it on issues which clearly lie within its
area of professional competence. But the ulti-
mate choice of policy clearly rests with the
top political leadership and there seems little
chance, in present circumstances, of.a serious
conflict of authority. Political controls over the
military structure, which run from top to bot-
tom, are evidently as effective as ever. There
is, in any case, a broad identity of outlook
between the political and military leaders con-
cerning the USSR’s security needs which serves
to minimize serious divergences between them
on major questions of foreign policy.

Economic Strengths and Weaknesses

19. Economic policy has always been a
prime source of political controversy within
the Soviet leadership. In the past, the issues
raised have largely revolved around questions
of growth rates and the allocation of scarce

investment funds among competing economic
roups. These problems remain, though they
now take a more complicated form; while
growth has been sufficient to support the
USSR’s expanding international role and a
larger and more expensive military establish-
ment, these enlarged demands make the budg-
etary choices more numerous and more com-
plex. Thus, choices must now be made not
only, as before, between heavy and light in-
dustry and military and civilian production,
but also between multiple categories of mili-
tary investment and between domestic eco-
nomic growth and the expansion of inter-
national activity. And underlying these issues
is the increasingly urgent problem of economic
modernization.

20. The basis of the USSR’s economic
strength is its great natural wealth, which
gives it self-sufficiency in nearly all important
raw materials, and a labor force about half
again as large as that of the US. Exercising
tight central direction over these resources, the
USSR has managed to achieve rates of eco-
nomic growth which are high by international
standards and to maintain a military effort
roughly equal to that of the US. It has also
been able to achieve a slow but steady im-
provement in the standard of living, although
consumption levels are far below those in the
advanced Western economies, In some sec-
tors—e.g., the defense industries and some
parts of heavy industry—the Soviet economy
is in some respects as advanced and efficient
as that of the US. In other sectors—such as
agriculture and consumer goods industries—
the Soviets remain woefully backward by com-
Parison.

21. The regime has succeeded in checking,
at least temporarily, the decline in the rate of
growth which set in in the early 1960s but
the rate still has not returned to the levels of
the 1950s and is unlikely to do so in the fore-
seeable future. This recovery has not been due

sober 13
Page-41
to higher rates of growth in industrial produc-
tion, which have remained relatively steady
in recent years, but to improved output in
construction and agriculture. Output in agri-
culture, however, has been and will remain
subject to wide annual fluctuations; there may,
for instance, be a sharp decline this year be-
cause of severe damage to the winter wheat
crop. For the Five Year Plan period now: in
progress (1971-1975), the regime is calling for
rates of increase in overall GNP and indus-
trial output slightly above the rates achieved
in the previous five years. The proportion of
resources allotted to investment, consumption,
and defense will evidently shift only slightly.

22. These plans are indicative of the present
conservatism of Soviet economic policy. This
was shown also by the timidity of the eco-
nomic reforms introduced in 1965 and by the
failure to follow through on even these with
vigorous implementation. Though the regime
appears to be unsure how to go about solving
its economic problems, it is clearly aware
what these are: low productivity and the de-
clining effectiveness of investment, due mainly
to an insufficiency of material incentives; and
to slowness in introducing advanced tech-
nology and modern managerial methods. One
sign of this official awareness is the growth
in the USSR’s purchases of agricultural prod-
ucts and consumer goods abroad and its in-
terest in increasing trade with Western Europe
and the US, especially in order to acquire
advanced technology. Many of the industrial
and agricultural products and much of the
technology the Soviets seek can be obtained
in other Western countries, but the US would
be the best source of some kinds of equipment,
some licenses, and some agricultural products
(e.g., feed grains). Inherent economic limita-
tions will, however, set bounds to any growth
in US-Soviet trade.?

 

* The prospects for US-Soviet trade are discussed
more fully in the attached Annex.

 

14

fx

23. The implications of the USSR’s eco-
nomic strengths and weaknesses for its mili-
tary posture and its position in SALT are of
two kinds, Economic constraints do not oblige
the Soviet leadership to reduce military spend-
ing; at present rates of growth, the economy
is capable of supporting current military pro-
grams and would even be able to support
a step-up in the rate of military spending,
without an increase in the share of resources
devoted to military purposes. The amount of
resources which would be freed by the kind
of limited agreement now on the agenda in
SALT would be relatively small. The rate of
economic growth would not be appreciably
increased if these resources were transferred
entirely to investment projects. Neverthe-
less, arms control could give the USSR eco-
nomic benefits. This is because present mili-
tary programs, by the demands they make on
high-quality human and material resources,
exacerbate the problems referred to above—
problems of labor productivity, investment ef-
ficiency, and technological progress, And the
Soviets have good reason to expect that, with
an intensification of the arms competition,
these problems would become even more
marked.

Internal Dissent

24. The appearance and, even more, the
persistence in recent years of an active poli-
tical protest which has found some of its most
effective advocates within the USSR’s priv-
ileged scientific-technical community has at-
tracted considerable attention in the West.
Closely related to this is the growth in na-
tional consciousness and assertiveness among
non-Great Russian minorities—Soviet Jews,
Ukrainians, the Baltic nationalities and the
Moslem-Turkic peoples of Central Asia. The
regime has itself shown some sensitivity to the
impact of these developments on its inter+

ber
Page-42
sfc:

national image. But whatever their potential
as future problems, these manifestations of
internal tension and alienation for now have
little relevance for Soviet foreign policy; what
relevance they do have stems largely from
their impact abroad. At home, to the extent
that Soviet decision-makers concern them-
selves with opinion outside their own small
circle, what counts more is the mood of the
Soviet masses, with whom the intellectual
dissidents have few connections. In general,
this broad popular opinion reinforces the re-
gime in its conduct of foreign policy, for there
can be little doubt that the ordinary Soviet
citizen——Russian and non-Russian alike—takes
considerable pride in the USSR’s world
position.

Ill. MAJOR ISSUES AND OPTIONS IN
SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY

25. By closing the gap in international
power between themselves and the US, the
Soviets—besides relieving themselves of many
old anxieties—now believe that they have
widened their options in the pursuit of long-
standing foreign policy objectives and im-
proved their opportunities for gaining advan-
tages over their adversaries. Yet, the struggle
to “catch up” for the most part posed fairly
simple policy choices as compared with some
of those which the Russians now face.

These involve such questions as:

would Sovict interests be better served
by a stabilization of the kind of parity
with the US in strategic weapons which
now exists or should the USSR seek a a
certain margin of advantage;

is stabilization in Europe compatible with
Soviet aims in either Western or Eastern
Europe;

what is the most effective response to the
Chinese on the several levels of rivalry—
military, political, and ideological;

how far and in what places should the
USSR pursue an activist policy in com-
petition with the US, China, or both; and,

in light of the foregoing, is the area of
possible accommodation with the US be-
coming wider or narrower?

26. Difficult in themselves, these questions
arise for the Soviets in a period of consider-
able flux in the post-World War II pattern
of international political and economic rela-
tions, and of rapid technological change and
widespread social dislocation within the ad-
vanced industrial nations. The scene facing
them in the Third World is also in many ways
more checkered. There, the Russians have in
some cases, by extending their commitments,
both increased their influence and narrowed
their room for maneuver. And, in much of the
non-aligned world, they can probably look
for increasingly vigorous competition from the
Chinese.

The Strategic Weapons Relationship
With the United States

27. At some point during the last few years
when the Soviets concluded that they were
nearing rough equality with the US, they faced
a broad choice concerning the further aims
of their strategic weapon programs. They
could push on in an attempt to establish clear
superiority—i.e., a superiority so evident that
they could be assured of success in a major
confrontation and even “win”, say, by a first
strike, should they press the issue to nuclear
war—or they could seek to control the com-
petition by negotiating agreements which
would stabilize the strategic relationship.
There are persuasive reasons for believing that
the Soviets decided against pursuing the first
course on several grounds: that it would be
enormously expensive; that it would engender
a corresponding effort by the US; that success
in such an effort is probably, in any case, not
at present technically feasible.

fo 15
Page-43
28. It remains unclear whether the Soviets
believe they can pursue a third option, that
of striving for a meaningful margin of
advantage, but one short of clear superiority."

‘Lt. Gen. Jammie M. Philpott, Acting Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency, believes that the Soviets
made the decision some years ago to obtain a mean-
ingful margin of advantage in military technology
and strategic weapons. He agrees that the US$R has
concluded that the attainment of a clear strategic
superiority is not now feasible. He believes, more-
over, that the decision to obtain a meaningful margin
of advantage could be modified as a result of a
SALT agreement. In any case, the Soviets will con-
tinue their vigorous R&D programs to provide quali-
tative improvements to their strategic forces.

Vice Adm. Noel Gayler, the Director, National Se-
curity Agency, believes that there are three courses
of action open to the Soviets with respect to strategic
nuclear weapons:

(a) To settle for rough parity with the US. They
retain this option at any time.

(b) To seek a margin of superiority sufficient
to gain world-wide political and psychologi-
cal advantage. This is the option they are
now pursuing.

(c) To seek superiority so overwhelming that
the Soviet Union could make a pre-emptive
or initiative strike without risking unaccept-
able damage in return. Since this option is
almost certainly technically infeasible, as
well as provocative of strong US reaction,
the Soviets in all probability do not intend it,

Rear Adm. Earl F, Rectanus, Director of Naval
Intelligence, Department of the Navy, and Maj. Gen.
George J. Keegan, Jr., Assistant Chief of Staff, In-
telligence, USAF, believe the Soviets have made the
decision to seck a meaningful margin of advantage
in strategic weapons as well as in general military
and technological capabilities, designed to enhance
the USSR’s political and psychological leverage
against the Free World. They note the persuasive
evidence of a continuing large-scale commitment of
resources to modern science, militarily-related tech-
nology, and specific weapons-development programs
far beyond those needed to assure rough equality.
Lacking any convincing evidence of a leveling-off of
Soviet R&D, construction programs, and deployments,
they believe that the Soviet leadership considers at-
tainment of a meaningful margin of advantage in both
strategic and general purpose forces to be economically
and technically feasible and is pursuing such a course,

 

 

Their on-going programs of strategic force im-
provements suggest that this could be their
view. We have no reliable indication regard-
ing Moscow’s thinking as to what would con-
stitute a useful edge in strategic weapons. It
can be reasonably inferred, however, that
there are some in Moscow who believe that
the USSR would gain, beyond the benefits
already conferred by the achievement of rough
equality, from a demonstrable lead in one or
more major strategic systems. They might cal-
culate that this margin, even though its mili-
tary significance might be highly problemati-
cal, would give the USSR increased political-
psychological leverage, partly because it could
be taken as a sign of the dynamic growth of
Soviet power as well as of Moscow’s determ-
ination to assert a strong international role.
Such an argument might appeal to some
within both the political and military leader-
ship, to the latter if oaly because it would
promise maintenance of the present momen-
tum of arms growth. Against these considera-
tions, however, the Soviet leaders would have
to reckon with the possibility that any attempt
to gain advantage would look to the US much
the same as an attempt to achieve superiority
and would produce the same counteraction.

29. The policy course the Soviets have
chosen, at least for the immediate future, is
to attempt to stabilize some aspects of the
strategic weapons relationship with the US
through negotiations. Throughout SALT they
have laid greatest stress on limiting antibal-
listic missile (ABM ) deployment—presumably
because of concern that major US deploy-
ments would be destabilizing to their dis-
advantage, and probably also out of a desire
to avoid the heavy new expenditures that any
large-scale ABM deployment on their side
would entail. However, they realize that any
agreement would have to provide for some
interim limitations on the further deployment
of strategic offensive weapons. They appear

16 cdc
Page-44
to believe that a formal ABM agreement and
an interim freeze on some strategic offensive
systems, on terms they can accept, are within
reach,

30. If, for some reason, an agreement is
not soon arrived at, the Soviets would none-
theless probably want to avoid the conse-
quences of a total failure in SALT. Such an
outcome would introduce new uncertainties
into the US-Soviet strategic relationship and
the Soviets would have reason to expect that
a resumption of unrestrained arms competi-
tion—perhaps even its intensification—would
ensue. This would entail heavy costs for the
Soviets but they would have no certainty that
they would be able to stay abreast in the
race. Thus, there would be some risk of their
losing the strategic and political benefits which
they derive from their present position of
equality. The Soviets would also have to con-
sider the possibility: that the breakdown of
SALT would seriously aggravate the overall
climate of US-Soviet relations and contribute
to an increase in international tension gen-
erally.

31. Such signs as have emerged from SALT
suggest that the Soviets see some chance that
the negotiations which will follow any first-
stage agreement will yield further results. We
do not have any good idea, however, as to
how far and how fast they are prepared to
go toward reaching agreement on comprehen-
sive limitations. There is a good probability
that the Russians themselves have not resolved
these questions. There are many factors which
might cause indecisiveness in Moscow and
complicate the Soviet leaders’ task of arriving
at a workable consensus. They may fear that
too comprehensive an agreement might in-
volve disadvantages they could not anticipate
or foreclose developments which might even-
tually improve their relative position. Further,
they would expect that the more complex the

agreement, the more the US would be dis
posed to press for modes of verification un-
acceptable to them. The Soviets would pre-
sumably expect that in negotiating the specific
elements of an agreement difficulties would
arise with the US over issues of asymmetry
and equivalence and over their deployment
of weapons against China. They and their
military leaders might also find it hard to
make choices with respect to the limitation
of particular on-going programs or develop-
mental systems which have promise for the
future.

32. A further stage of negotiations could
therefore well prove to be protracted and
beset by frequent periods of stalemate. As
the talks went on, the Soviets would no doubt
proceed with certain additions to their stra-
tegic forces and continue intensive efforts in
research and development and in the process
might raise doubts in the US about their in-
tentions. US activities could raise similar
doubts in Moscow. Nonetheless, we think the
Soviet inclination will be to continue the ex-
ploration. But the Soviets are likely to favor
a gradualist approach, one which will enable
them to discover through the negotiating
process itself whether a more comprehensive
agreement, and with it a fuller stabilization
of the US-Soviet strategic relationship, is ob-
tainable on acceptable terms.

China: The USSR’s Second Front a

33. The Soviets find it hard to acknowledge
once and for all that the Sino-Soviet rift is
unbridgeable. They are, in any case, loath
to have it be thought that they are obliged
because of their concerns to the East to be
more accommodating toward the West. Yet,
they seem to have recognized for some time
that their problems with China are in many
Ways more urgent and more intractable than
their problems with the US. They seem to

be 17
Page-45
see

realize also that the conflict—in both its great
power and ideological aspects—is as likely
as not to become more pervasive, and possibly
more dangerous, as time goes on. This is so
partly because of the potential growth of
Chinese military power and partly because
of China’s emerging prominence on the world
stage. In their world-wide contest the Chinese
will sometimes be able to beat the Russians
at their own “revolutionary” game. And they
will enjoy (as the Russians themselves long
did) the demagogic advantages which the
weaker party often has over the stronger.

34. In dealing with the Chinese problem,
the Russians have in recent years given highest
priority to military measures aimed at secur-
ing their land frontiers and establishing the
credibility of their military deterrent. This
has led during the last seven years to a massive
reinforcement of Soviet forces in the border
area. In the course of this, Soviet ground
forces opposite China have been increased
from 15 to some 40 divisions, tactical aircraft
from 200 to over 1,000, and tactical nuclear
m'ssile launchers from about 50 to over 300.
Emphasis during the past two years has
shifted from the introduction of new units
to the fleshing-out of units already deployed
and to improvements in the support structure.
Though this may portend a leveling-off of
the buildup, Soviet military planners will prob-
ably want at a minimum to prepare their forces
in coming years for a wider variety of con-
tingencies, defensive and offensive, than they
are now designed for. Further deployments
and improvements are therefore likely. At the
same time, as China’s military strength grows,
increasing numbers of Soviet strategic offen-
sive and defensive systems will need to be
earmarked for use against a possible Chinese
threat.

35. Moscow sought in 1969 to use its
strengthened military posture opposite China

to intimidate the Chinese. The Russians took
other steps to this end (e.g., by conveying—
through foreign Communist channels—an im-
plied threat of nuclear attack). But if Moscow
was then giving serious consideration to a
military solution, it evidently rejected this op-
tion, choosing instead to temporize. This has
meant keeping alive the border negotiations—
from which, evidently, no agreements have
emerged—some increase in trade; and holding
open the USSR’s offer of “normalization”.
Meanwhile, the USSR has proceeded with ef-
forts to isolate and contain the Chinese by
strengthening its own position in the coun-
tries on China's periphery.

36. Despite China’s weakness relative to the
Soviets, it has considerable capacity to frus-
trate the USSR’s ambitions, undermining its
position both as a world power and the para-
mount Communist state. Indeed, in much of
the underdeveloped world the Chinese have
better credentials than the Russians for the
role of patron of small, weak nations and
prophet of “national liberation”. Among Com-
munist Parties, including those in Eastern Eu-
rope, China attracts both genuine sympathy
and self-interested support for its struggle
against Soviet authority. And Maoism has
wider appeal than Soviet Communism among
the youth of the New Left.

37. The brunt of Moscow's anger over the
Washington-Peking détente has fallen on the
Chinese. To some extent, this is because Mos-
cow recognizes that its relations with the US
are at a delicate stage, but it also reflects the
bitterness which China now inspires in Mos-
cow, and probably also a sense of frustration
at the realization that a decade of political
and military pressures against the Chinese
have proved to be futile. The Soviets certainly
understand that Peking is now likely to be
even more unwilling than before to make con-
cessions to them, and that Chinese prestige
and authority among Communists and under-

18 seer
Page-46
sagher

developed countries may now be significantly
enhanced. It has no doubt also occurred to the
Soviets that the US may well gain some in-
creased freedom of maneuver against them;
that, in the setting of a less hostile relation-
ship, Washington and Peking will in some
situations follow parallel policies at Soviet ex-
pense; and that the Chinese may be on the
way to obtaining increased Western (and
Japanese) industrial equipment and _tech-
nology.

38. The new US-Chinese relationship could
make a military solution to the Sino-Soviet con-
flict seem to the Soviets an even less attrac-
tive alternative than before. But this sign that
a new Asian configuration has begun to
emerge is likely to suggest to them a more
active political involvement in Asia. The in-
clination of many of the Asian non-Commu-
nist states to strike a more even balance in
their relations with the US, China, and the
USSR will probably mean that the Russians
will find freer entrée for their diplomatic and
trade missions and greater hospitality for naval
visits. At the same time, the Asian nations
have shown a notable lack of enthusiasm for
the Asian collective security system proposed
by Moscow in 1969, and such a scheme seems
likely to find wider appeal only if the threat of
Chinese military expansion grows. The most
profitable course for Moscow may therefore
be to concentrate on strengthening its bilateral
ties with the established governments in the
area. While these efforts will enlarge the Soviet
presence in Asia and its influence in certain
countries, in the area as a whole, the Soviet
role will be limited by the desire of most
states to preserve their relations with other
outside powers,

39. In both North Korea and North Viet-
nam, the USSR’s minimum aim has been, and
will continue to be, to prevent either of the
two smaller Communist states from passing
firmly into the Chinese sphere of influence.

In its policy toward the Indochina war, the
post-Khrushchev leadership has consistently
taken great care to maintain solidarity behind
the North Vietnamese in their war aims and
negotiating position. Moscow would probably
prefer to see the elimination of the war as a
major issue in Soviet-American relations, but
it would still want the struggle to end on
terms that would assure final success for
Hanoi’s aims. In fact, against the background
of an improved US-Chinese relationship, the
Soviets are likely to want to show themselves

as staunch as ever in their support of Hanoi. |

They probably believe that their interests vis-
a-vis China would be best served if in the
long run North Vietnam achieved dominance
in Indochina. It remains unlikely therefore
that Moscow would suspend material support
to Hanoi ar_use its influence there—which is in
any case limited—to urge the North Vietnamese
to end the war on less than satisfactory terms.

40. The Soviets will have a major concem
for consolidating their position in India. They
are also obliged to look more intently toward
their relations with the other great power in
Asia, Japan. Strains in US-Japanese relations
arising from economic frictions and the turn
in US-Chinese relations give Moscow some
encouragement. But the Japanese seem little
inclined to prejudice future political and eco-
nomic ties with China or their security ties
with the US for the sake of better relations
with Moscow. Moscow has reason to be con-
cerned, in fact, that the Japanese will now
move rapidly toward the normalization of
their own relations with China. All the Rus-
sians have been willing to offer the Japanese
so far is participation in the exploitation of
the mineral, oil, and timber resources of
Siberia, an offer the Japanese may find less
tempting than the prospect of greater access
to the Chinese market. It would appear there-
fore that, if the Russians hope to make head-
way in Tokyo, they will need fairly soon to

segfer 9
Page-47
soft

make concessions on the old issue of the
Northern Territories, though the Japanese may
settle for something less than the return of
all of the disputed islands.

41. Although Sino-Soviet relations will not
necessarily remain as bad as they are now,
any deep and lasting accommodation would
require the Russians to pay a price which they
would consider unacceptably high. This would
include a lifting of- military pressures, some
territorial concessions, a solemn disavowal of
Moscow’s pretensions as the paramount author-
ity among Communists, and the acknowledge-
ment of a Chinese sphere of influence in Asia.
Nevertheless, at some point, the two sides
might arrive at a modus vivendi which would
permit them to “coexist” more or less nor-
mally, would reduce the chances of major bor-
der hostilities, and perhaps lead eventually
to an understanding on nuclear restraint. There
are no doubt many among the Soviet ortho-
dox for whom the conflict with the West seems
a much more natural and permanent condition
than the conflict with China, and there are
realists who will see steps toward normaliza-
tion in US-Chinese relations as requiring off-
setting Soviet moves toward Peking. A changes
over in the leadership in Moscow or the death
of Mao may, in any case, be followed by a
new high-level Soviet approach to Peking.

Détente in Europe

42. Not coincidentally, the only policies to
which the name of the principal Soviet leader
has been attached, the “Brezhnev Peace
Policy” and the “Brezhnev Doctrine” of lim-
ited sovereignty apply mainly to Europe. The
policies embraced by these terms are, in fact,
closely related, in that détente in Europe is
viewed by Moscow as part of the process of
strengthening its position in both Eastern Eu-
rope and Western Europe. The Chinese prob-
lem, though probably not at this stage a crucial

20

 

factor, is, nevertheless, also an important
strand in Soviet European policy. And, where
it concerns the security of the Soviet sphere
in Eastern Europe and the future of the two
Germanies, this policy is apparently a sensitive
issue of internal party politics and thus may
be an area of policy more susceptible to
tactical variation than others.

43. The Soviet Position in Eastern Europe.
Without a secure position in Eastern Europe
Moscow cannot face either the West or China
confidently, but developments in Czechoslo-
vakia in 1968 and in Poland in 1970 demon-
strated that 25 years of Soviet hegemony had
not actually guaranteed this security. Order
has been restored in Czechoslovakia and Po-
land, and Romania and the USSR have veered
away from a collision course. But in dealing
with these different forms of defiance the So-
viets have not Zot at root causes, among them
the tenacious East European nationalisms and
the inability of Soviet-installed political and
social systems to respond to the present eco-
nomic needs of those countries. In these cir-
cumstances, leaders in many of these countries
have tried to make the task of governing easier
by tapping the forces of nationalism, of which
anti-Sovietism is an inevitable by-product. The
leaders of the Czechoslovak reform movement
tried to find a different set of answers and
introduced some of the practices of social
democracy, which in Soviet eyes are hardly
less pernicious than nationalism. In any event,
many East European leaders believe that with
greater national autonomy and wider political
and economic intercourse with the countries
of the West they could better come to grips
with their internal problems.

44, Among all Moscow’s client states, East
Germany is likely to remain for some time to
come its major concern. The East German
regime under Ulbricht’s successors still has a
deeper sense of political insecurity than any

her
Page-48
ra

other in Eastern Europe. Although Ulbricht
managed over the years to create a certain
sense of East German national identity, the
regime is acutely fearful of the expansion
of contacts between the two parts of Germany
and in fact of any trend toward European
détente. As a consequence, Moscow, though
hardly without its own anxieties, found it nec-
essary to keep a strong arm on the East Ger-
mans in order to carry them through the Ber-
lin negotiations and into the inter-German
talks,

45. There are many places in Eastern Eu-
rope where the Russians could be faced with
difficult choices in the next few years. Internal
problems and pressures for reform may recur
in Poland and Czechoslovakia. The issue be-
tween Moscow and Bucharest has been post-
poned, not settled, and the Romanians can
expect at some point to feel the cold Soviet
breath on their necks again, either in the form
of political or military pressures, or both. Yugo-
slavia remains—from the Soviet point of
view—a baneful influence on the rest of East-
ern Europe. It is, in a sense, unfinished busi-
ness. The Soviets are no doubt watching with
keen interest Yugoslavia’s current internal dif-
ficulties and trying to anticipate the situation
which will unfold when Tito has left the scene.
If a period of disarray ensues, the possibili-
ties for Soviet meddling would be consider-
able, and, if it saw a chance of restoring a
pro-Soviet regime, Moscow would be strongly
tempted to interfere in more direct ways.

46. The USSR has, since Czechoslovakia, in-
tensified its efforts to improve its organiza-
tional control over the political, military, and
economic affairs of the East European states.
These efforts, centering on the Warsaw Pact
structure and the Council on Economic Mu-
tual Assistance (CEMA), are partly a matter
of strengthening intra-Bloc discipline. They
are probably also designd to insure that man-

che

agement of the Bloc’s approach in any nego-
tiations on European security and in dealings
with the European Economic Community
(EEC) will remain securely in Soviet hands,

47. The Soviets have made limited progress.
The Warsaw Pact’s political bodies are meet-
ing more frequently than in the past, and with
the creation of the Military Council and the
Committee of Defense Ministers, as well as
the expansion .of the Pact staff, some steps
toward integration of the Pact’s military com-
mand structure have been taken. Moscow has,
at the same time, sought to obtain further
leverage, through CEMA and through bi-
lateral arrangements, in the economic plan-
ning and trade patterns of the East European
countries. Though full integration of the So-
viet Bloc economies remains a distant goal,
some East European governments have re-
cently shown increased interest in limited
moves in that direction,

48. Eastern Europe remains, in many ways,
a millstone for the Russians. The USSR’s task
of reconciling its efforts to consolidate its
hegemony there with its efforts to develop its
relations with Western Europe can only be
complicated and delicate. Its aim will be to
limit the political and ideological impact of
expanded East-West contacts and it is evident
from its present course that the prevalent view
in Moscow is that this can be managed, But,
if it came to a choice between erosion of its
position in Easter Europe and détente in
Europe, Moscow would choose to let the latter
suffer.

49. Objectives in Western Europe. Beyond
these security concerns in Eastern Europe, the
USSR’s own economic weaknesses and growing
preoccupation—avith—the_Chinese_front have
turned it away from the politics of crisis and
confrontation in Europe. At the same time,
the changing pattern of US-West European
relationships and trends within Western Eu-

 

21
Page-49
of

rope itself favoring a winding-down of the
prolonged East-West confrontation have evi-
dently convinced Moscow that long-standing
aims have become more realizable than ever
before. It sees in these circumstances oppor-
tunities to weaken NATO, to secure the per-
manent division of Germany, to reduce the
presence and influence of the US, and to ad-
vance its longer-term aim of establishing the
USSR as the predominant political and mili-
tary power on the continent. These motives
have, during the last several years, gained
added force from two significant develop-
ments, one positive from the Soviet point of
view, the other negative: the recasting and
reinvigoration of West Germany's Ostpolitik,
and developments within the EEC.

50. What was new and important for the
Soviets in the Brandt government's Ostpolitik,
as compared with the Ostpolitik of the pre-
vious Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany (FRG), was that it included a readi-
ness to affirm the inviolability of the post-
war borders of Eastern Europe and to accord
de facto recognition to East Germany. Brandt
also acknowledged that in seeking an open-
ing to the East it was essential for him to
work first through Moscow rather than with
the individual East European governments.
This in Moscow’s view was a promising be-
ginning. As Ostpolitik unfolded further the
Soviets probably began to see the possibility of
richer rewards in the future: that in time
they would be able to bring pressure on the
FRG’s domestic and foreign policies because
of its vested interest in maintaining Ostpolitik,
and perhaps gradually compromise or loosen
the FRG’s security ties with the West and
especially the US.

51. But the renewed movement toward
West European economic integration, most
clearly signaled by the prospective entry of
Britain into the EEC, was a worrisome devel-

opment for the Russians. The Soviets have
feared that the EEC will evolve into a tight
and exclusive economic community and that
they and the East European countries will be
put at a bargaining disadvantage in com-
mercial dealings with it. Another concern is
that the governments of West Europe will
begin to move toward political unity as well—
toward common foreign policies and common
defense arrangements. Moscow’s obvious pref-
erence is for a situation in which it can deal
with the West European states separately
rather than through the medium of NATO or
a politically cohesive European Community.
In this way it can better promote frictions
between Western Europe and the US and
among the West European states themselves.
The Russians hope to find opportunities in
this regard, for example, for playing on
Franco-German rivalry, a rivalry which they
have already shown some skill in manipu-
lating.

 

52. A conference on European security rep-
resents for Moscow one way of encouraging
favorable trends in Western Europe and slow-
ing adverse ones. The Soviets have always be-
lieved that the organizing theme of such a con-
ference should be “Europe for the Europeans”,
themselves included, and, though they have
given up their efforts to have the US and
Canada excluded, they still hope that the
conference will give birth to permanent pan-
European bodies which might come to serve
as a counterattraction to the Western alli-
ance and the EEC. More immediately, how-
ever, Moscow would expect the conference to
constitute further acknowledgement of the
status quo in Eastern Europe and, through
East Germany’s participation, further de facto
recognition of the division of Germany. By
strengthening the momentum of détente and
easing West Europe’s security concerns, the
conference might also serve to deprive West-
ern Europe of an incentive to political unifi-

22 seffer
Page-50
sift

cation and military cooperation, As a supple-
ment to the security conference, the Soviets
are holding out to West Europeans the pros-
pect of East-West cooperation in the areas of
transportation, power, communications, and
environmental control, and the lure of access
for their manufactures to the Soviet market
(though the possibilities in this latter area are
limited by an absence of reciprocal Western
demand for the products of the East).

53. The Soviets have, of course, been re-
quired to make some concessions of their own
in order to maintain the momentum of détente.
With respect to Berlin, for example, for the
sake of advancing their policies toward West
Germany and gaining some increased recogni-
tion of East German sovereignty, the Russians
have accepted the loss of some of the leverage
which Berlin’s isolation gave them in the past.
They may come to believe at some point that
in making further concessions in Europe they
would be in danger of giving away too much.
They will also be sensitive to the danger of
ideological contamination from any substan-
tial increase in East-West communication. And
the Russians may move more slowly on détente
if they encounter difficulties in maintaining
strict discipline among the East European
countries; some of these want to move faster
than the Russians do in broadening contacts
with the West, and others, like the East Ger-
mans, will insist on moving at the slowest
pace possible.

54. The West German Parliament’s stand
on the ratification of the FRG-Soviet treaty
will provide Moscow with an early, possibly
even a crucial, test of the soundness of its
German policy. It will give the Brandt gov-
ernment some assistance in promoting ratifi-
cation of the pact. Rejection by the Bunde-
stag would be treated as a grievous insult by
Moscow, and it would, in fact, deal a blow to
its rather fragile confidence in the “healthy
forces” in West Germany. But the Soviets,

 

recognizing that Brandt is working with the
slimmest of majorities, have reckoned with
the possibility that the treaty might run into
trouble, and may thus be partly insulated
against the shock of an initial defeat. In this
case, the immediate result would probably be
a display of Soviet anger, which would convey
the implication that the entire process of Eu-
ropean détente was endangered, and a clear
indication that the agreement on Berlin was
up in the air. This might then be followed
by a pause pending developments in West
Germany. Much more serious questions would
naturally arise in Moscow if, in the new elec-
tions which would almost certainly ensue from
defeat of the treaty in the Bundestag, the
Brandt coalition was replaced by a govern-
ment committed to a harder line toward the
Soviets. In these circumstances, the Soviets
might still be inclined to try, after a necessary
delay, to salvage as much as possible of their
German policy, for its own sake and for the
sake of their European position as a whole.
But strong anti-German impulses might by
then have been revived and the issue become
embroiled in Kremlin politics. There is the
further possibility that Brezhnev himself, be.
cause of his close personal involvement, would
suffer political damage from a setback to
Ostpolitik,

55. Force Reductions in Europe. The USSR’s
present position on mutual force reductions
in Europe (MBFR) appears to be primarily
an element in its overall European tactics.
This consideration, rather than economic pres-
sures or force requirements connected with
the buildup on the Sino-Soviet border, prob-
ably accounts for the more forthcoming atti-
tude on this question adopted by the USSR
in the last year or two. Thus, Moscow may
have concluded that an expression of inter-
est in NATO proposals on force reductions
would hasten the convening of a conference
on European security and in general contrib-

be 23
Page-51
ute to the impression that Moscow is working
in earnest for solutions to European problems.

56. Moscow has so far given little indica-
tion of how it intends to play its hand on
force reductions. It has said that the result
of any negotiations should be such “as not
to be to the detriment of the countries taking
part”, and it evidently intends to resist strongly
the notion of asymmetrical reductions, It is
opposed to a bloc-to-bloc negotiation, pre-
sumably because in its view such an arrange-
ment might give a lift to the vitality and
organizational cohesion of NATO and have
contrary effects within the Warsaw Pact. The
Soviets would prefer to see the US and ,the
USSR become the principal parties to further
discussions, partly because this would arouse
anxieties among the US’ NATO allies, and
they will probably try at the upcoming US-
Soviet summit meeting to discover whether
they can move matters in that direction,

57. Considerations of this kind have some-
thing to do with the tentativeness of the Soviet
position on MBFR and the slowness with
which it has unfolded. These may also be
attributable to Soviet doubts as to whether
negotiations are desirable in the first place
and perhaps to internal differences in Mos-
cow. Such doubts probably revolve around
concerns over the potential effects of force
reductions on the USSR’s control in Eastern
Europe and its military Position vis-a-vis
NATO. As long as concerns of this sort per-
sist, there will be some reluctance in Moscow
to carry out any reductions at all. It will be
contended that the USSR’s position in Eastern
Europe is vulnerable to Western influences
which would spread more easily in a relaxed
political setting, and that even modest Russian
troop withdrawals would whet nationalist
aspirations. It may be further argued that a
position of undiminished Soviet military
strength in Europe not only serves as a power-

ful deterrent to NATO but also has a useful
political and pyschological impact on the
West.

58. We believe, nevertheless, that Moscow

is coming to accept that, assuming continuation
of present trends in East-West relations in
Europe, it could withdraw some of its forces
from Eastern Europe, particularly some of the
300,000 Soviet military Personnel] in East Ger-
many, and still retain sufficient capability to
maintain a strong posture against NATO, to
intimidate the East European populations, and
to reassert control in Eastern Europe quickly
and decisively in an emergency. This does not
mean the Soviets have decided on any re-
duction in their forces or that they are likely
to make such a decision in the near future.
But if they should decide to move beyond
tneir present position, they will presumably
«see advantage in thoroughly exploring the
possibilities of a negotiated agreement rather
than acting unilaterally in any reduction of
their forces. They might see this as a way of
giving greater momentum to Political forces
in the West which they wish to encourage.
They might also see in. such an approach a
means of influencing the pace and scope of
US withdrawals and thus of preventing the
sudden opening up of a military gap in Cen-
tral Europe which they might fear the West
Germans would move to fill.

59. On the other hand, if the Soviets con.
cluded that negotiations are either not immi-
nent or not feasible at all, or that negotiations
once undertaken would prove too difficult to
promise a favorable result, they might then
make limited withdrawals on their own, pri-
marily for political effect. They might do so
in part on the calculation that US force re-
ductions, which could be politically and mili-
tarily far more significant, would surely follow.

24 sof
Page-52
sof

Soviet Involvement in the Middle East

60. Moscow has gone far toward realizing
its historical goal of establishing itself per.
manently as a power in the Middle East and
the Mediterranean. In order to do so, it has
assumed extensive commitments to the Arabs
in their conflict with Israel and in the process
its prestige has become deeply engaged. At
this stage, the USSR’s close political and mili-
tary ties with Egypt are crucial to its whole
position in the Middle East, and in order to
preserve these, as well as the military bene-
fits which they themselves derive from the
use of Egyptian facilities, the Soviets have
been willing to increase their direct involve-
ment and to accept larger risks, But the Rus-
sians have almost certainly not given the
Egyptians an open-ended commitment. In gen-
eral, the Soviets aim at giving the Egyptians
a greater degree of military security and
saving them from further humiliation at the
hands of Israel, and thus fortifying Cairo’s
bargaining position, while forestalling the re-
sumption of major hostilities.

61. A full-scale renewal of the Arab-Israeli
war would be unwelcome to the Russians on
several counts. The war would undoubtedly
o against their clients unless they themselves
were prepared to become directly involved on
a sizeable scale. Such a course would carry
with it a high risk of escalation and therefore
of a severe US counteraction. It would prob-
ably also arouse great anxiety in Europe and
thus damage Soviet détente strategy there.
And in the face of these possibilities sharp
divisions might arise within the Soviet leader-
ship. Against this background, the Russians
must view the present situation as fairly fragile
and experience some anxiety because of the
tenuousness of the ceasefire and uncertainty
about President Sadat’s readiness to hew
closely to their lead. The Soviets have sought
through the Soviet-Egyptian Treaty of May

1971 to gain some increased measure of con-
trol over Egypt's military policies and actions,

62. It may be that the Soviets anticipate
and are prepared to live with a prolonged
period of stalemate. They might reckon that,
if political and military pressures are judi-
ciously maintained, Israel and the US can
eventually be brought to accept a political
settlement which largely meets Arab terms,
But they cannot be confident of such an out-
come, and, in view of the present hazards in
the situation, there is also some chance that
Moscow will come to see the desirability of
urging the Arab states mainly concerned to
accept a limited, interim agreement—one
which does not provide for the return of all
Israeli-occupied territory. The Soviets might
believe that such a step would diminish the
dangers of renewed hostilities while still
allowing them to enjoy the fruits of continued
Arab-Israeli animosity, and, in addition, give
them the benefits of passage through the Suez
Canal.

63. But apart from the question of whether
the Soviets will encourage the Arabs to move
in this direction or what the terms of any
agreement might be, they would be much con-
cerned to insure that they have, and are seen
to have, a major role in any deliberations
affecting the Arab-Israeli conflict. They also
want to insure that their Arab friends continue
to look to them for political and military sup-
port. This consideration seems likely, in the
Soviet view, to be a persuasive argument
against an explicit understanding with the US
limiting the flow of arms to the Middle East.
This is not to say, however, that Moscow would
not see in tacit mutual restraint a means of
avoiding a spiralling arms race which would
increase the uncontrollable elements in the
situation, might draw the Russians into a more
dangerous military involvement, and would be
fairly costly.

she : 25
Page-53
he

64. Although the Arab-Israeli conflict has
contributed greatly to the growth of the Soviet
role in the Middle East, Moscow no doubt aims
at establishing a position in which neither
its military presence in the Mediterranean nor
its political influence in the area is dependent
on the exigencies of that conflict. The Rus-
sians will probably want, besides solidifying
their position in the Arab world, to further
enhance the capabilities of their Mediter-
ranean naval forces and will probably try to
expand their operations in the Western Medi-
terranean. The Soviets may also hope in the
long run to gain an influential role in the
Middle East oil industry. The pursuit of these
various aims will entail, in addition to
efforts to consolidate the Soviet political
and military position in Egypt, attempts to
strengthen ties with the other radical Arab
states, probably involving in some cases treaty
relationships as well as continuing emphasis
on military assistance. It will also mean fur-
ther cultivation of the moderate Arab states
of the area.

65. The Russians are probably generally
optimistic about their long-term prospects
among the Arab nations of the Middle East.
They are no doubt right in thinking that the
existence of radical, anti-Western nationalism
will continue to assure them a role of influence
in the area; they may believe, beyond this,
that these forces will spread and will even-
tually enable the USSR to establish itself as
the dominant power in the Middle East. But
Moscow nonetheless has cause to feel some
insecurity in its present position. It has seen
that radical nationalism has on occasion taken
a violently anti-Russian tum—as in Libya and
the Sudan. It has some sense of the difficulty
of following a coherent and even-handed
policy among the diverse and quarrelsome
states of the area and of staying aloof from
their rivalries and jealousies. And, more im-
portant, there is uncertainty in Moscow as to
whether the links it has forged with ruling

 

parties in the radical Arab states—e.g., the
ASU in Egypt and the Baath parties in Syria
and Iraq—are strong enough to withstand the
vagaries of Arab politics.

The Soviets and the Third World

66. During roughly 15 years of active in-
volvement in the Third World, the USSR has
gained, besides its present strong position in
the Middle East, a pivotal role in South Asia
and wider influence in Southeast Asia, Latin
America, and Africa. For the reasons suggested
in the preceding section, the Arab Middle East
will surely continue to be an area of priority
interest for the USSR. Other areas close to the
USSR’s southern periphery—e.g., Turkey, Iran,
and Afghanistan—will remain, as they have
long been, of special concern to Moscow. The
Russians may also become more active in Asia
in the next few years as part of their effort
to check the spread of Chinese influence. But
the view prevalent in Moscow a decade or so
ago that the entire Third World was a fertile
field for Soviet exploitation has since given
way, partly under the impact of some serious
setbacks, to more sober calculations, Espe-
cially in the more distant areas, such as Africa
and Latin America, where Soviet security in-
terests are not so closely engaged and the
USSR cannot so readily bring its military
power to bear, this earlier exuberance seems
to have faded; in those areas Moscow is now
much more likely to respond to such oppor-
tunities as occur on a careful, case-by-case
basis.

67. Viewed as a naval and maritime medium
and as a segment of the Third World, the
Indian Ocean and its littoral states may rep-
resent for the Soviets a kind of geopolitical
unity. Otherwise, though their presence in the
area as a whole has grown in recent years, this
vast area contains a wide range of interests
for the Soviets and within it they are pursuing
a variety of more or less distinct regional ob-
jectives. Soviet interests and activities in the

26 sfx
Page-54
Red Sea and Persian Gulf areas are, thus,
largely an outgrowth of Soviet aims in the
Arab Middle East generally. The growth of
the USSR’s political presence in South and
Southeast Asia and its naval presence in the
Indian Ocean also serve its Chinese policy.
India is important to Moscow as a counter-
weight to China in Asia, as a sometimes anti-
American influence, and in its own right as
the dominant power in the subcontinent.

68. The Soviets no doubt see their position
in South Asia as having been considerably
strengthened by the outcome of the Indo-
Pakistani war. They have moved quickly in the
aftermath to establish themselves in Bangla-
desh. They will certainly work to insure that
their ties with India remain firm and durable.
There are sure to be irritations in the relation-
ship, nonetheless, and serious frictions may
even occur in time. The Indians would not
welcome an overly assertive Soviet presence
in the area. The Russians for their part will
not want their position in the area to be linked
too exclusively to Indian policy. Although Mos-
cow is likely to be faced with increasing
demands for aid, it will be reluctant to assume
any very heavy burdens in supporting the eco-
nomic development of India or of the many
other economically backward countries of the
region. Broadly speaking, this will probably
be true also for the Indian Ocean area as a
whole. As for the Soviet naval presence in the
Indian Ocean, we would expect over time only
a moderate growth, though this rate might be
increased if there were any significant increase
in US or Chinese activity in the ocean.®

69. Africa seems likely to have a relatively
low priority for Soviet policy for some time
to come. The Russians will, however, be

*See NIE 11-10-71, “The Uses of Soviet Military
Power in Distant Areas”, dated 15 December 1971,
SECRET, paragraphs 45-49 and 95-97, for a more
extensive treatment of the political and military aspects
of the Soviet presence in the Indian Ocean.

watching closely the activities of the Chinese,
and to the extent that Peking seems to be
gaining influence among “progressive” Afri-
cans, Moscow will consider countermeasures
or matching programs. At this stage, Moscow
scems willing to leave to the Chinese a gran-
diose project like the Tan-Zam Railroad but
will probably offer more competition if Chi-
nese activity greatly expands in sub-Saharan
Africa.

70. In Latin America, the rise of radical na-
tionalism and the election of a Marxist-led
government in Chile are viewed in Moscow as
promising trends, The Soviets will be alert
for opportunities to encourage anti-US trends
and to extend their own influence in the area,
with continued emphasis on the expansion of
diplomatic ties with the Latin American coun-
tries. Soviet cultural and propaganda activi-
ties will probably also grow. The USSR’s trade
with Latin America is not likely to increase
substantially in the near future, though Mos-
cow may find a number of openings for the
sale of arms. The Soviets may, in addition,
move gradually to show their naval forces oc-
casionally in Latin American waters beyond
the Caribbean—where they now have a small
but virtually continuous presence. However,
the Russians will probably take some care
to keep their military activities in the area at
a level which wil] not prove provocative either
to the US or the Latin American states.*

71. Though characterized by opportunism
and regional differentiation, the USSR’s ap-
proach to the Third World is, at the same
time, broadly conditioned by its urge to claim
a wider world role for itself and by the need
to protect its revolutionary credentials. The
USSR’s acquisition in recent years of a greater

"See NIE 80/90-71, “The Soviet Role in Latin
America”, dated 29 April 1971, SECRET, for a more

e treatment of this subject.

 

offic 27
Page-55
a

array of military instruments which can be
used in distant areas—though these support
the overall military mission of the Soviet
armed forces—may seem to Moscow to give
it wider options in its pursuit of these politi-
cal objectives. This capability enables the So-
viets to support political forces friendly to
their policies and may make it possible in
some situations for them to pre-empt the, ac-
tions of others or to deter their intervention.

72, But the Soviets are limited in their capa-
bilities to use force at long range to establish
themselves against opposition. The growth of
these capabilities has not followed the course
that might have been expected if the Soviets
were building them specifically for direct
military intervention in Third World coun-
tries. Nevertheless, as, in the years ahead,
the USSR further involves its policy and pres-
tige in remote areas, it will have to consider
requirements for forces to respond to a wide
range of contingencies, whether to prevent
setbacks or to exploit opportunities. We be-
lieve that step-by-step the Soviets, perhaps
without ever making a decision on the general
principle, will acquire capabilities which
would permit them to employ combat forces
in distant areas,

73. In these circumstances, the Russians
will have a growing need for shore-based facil-
ities in foreign countries. They will, however,
face difficulties in meeting their future needs
in this respect, particularly because most of the
countries which are geographically positioned
to offer the kind of facilities the Russians
might want will be reluctant, on political
grounds, to do so. Few are likely to believe,
as Egypt and Cuba did, that they have such
a need for Soviet support against a third-party
threat as to warrant the granting of basing
rights. We do not rule out the establishment
of other facilities in Third World countries—

28 sf

especially if comparable circumstances re-
cur—but the force of nationalism will remain
an impediment in most cases.7

IV. THE FUTURE SETTING OF SOVIET-
AMERICAN RELATIONS

74. The preceding paragraphs have sug-
gested a number of ways in which the broad
setting of US-Soviet relations has been al-
tered in recent years. The Soviets evidently
believe that as a consequence of these changes
their international position relative to that of
the US has been strengthened, though in a
situation of considerable flux. The continuing
overriding necessity of avoiding nuclear war
with the US will for some time to come re-
main an important constraint on Soviet be-
havior, and the uncertainties stemming from
the shifting pattern of international align-
ments may act as an inhibition on them. At
the same time, because of the USSR’s urge to
enlarge its world role, its relationship with the
US will retain a sharp competitive edge.

75. The USSR has compelling reasons for
wanting to keep its relations with the US in
reasonably good repair. A certain level of
amity is essential in the first place to the
maintenance of communications on issues af-
fecting the bilateral strategic relationship. It is
also useful to Moscow to have open channels
for the discussion of such issues of common
concer to the superpowers as nuclear non-
proliferation and for crisis management in
those cases where conflicts between other par-
ties contain the threat of escalation to gen-
eral war. A worsening of relations, conversely,
could create complications for Moscow in the
conduct of its policies in Europe and toward

* The USSR’s capabilities for distant military action
and Soviet thinking about their uses are dealt with
more fully in NIE 11-10-71, “The Uses of Soviet
Military Power in Distant Areas”, dated 15 December
1971, SECRET.
Page-56
Te

China. Rising tension with the US would also
have undesirable internal consequences for the
Soviet leaders to the extent that it generated
military requirements which would add to eco-
nomic strains. It may be that in the present
phase the Soviet leaders regard normal and
continuing contact, perhaps including occa-
sional meetings at the highest level, as essen-
tial to a careful management of the multi-
faceted Soviet-American relationship.

76. But continued political rivalry involving
some amount of tension is implicit in the
philosophical divergence between the US and
the USSR over the ordering of international
relations and the USSR’s refusal to underwrite
stability, except in Eastern Europe and the
USSR itself. It is also owing to the fact that
the larger world role to which the USSR as-
Pires is unrealizable except at the expense of
the US. Tension with the US, at the same time,
has traditionally been used by the regime to
mobilize and control the Soviet population and
to sanction its monopoly of power.

77. Whether, within these broad limits, the
USSR will in particular circumstances lean
toward sharper competition or broader co-
operation with the US will naturally depend
on the interaction of many variables, Crucial
among these will be Moscow’s appraisal of US
intentions, and, in particular, the extent to
which it will be able to overcome the suspi-
cion that the US aims at using conciliation as
an instrument of political and ideological sub-
version within the Soviet sphere. Given their
present reading of comparative strengths,
there may, on the other hand, be instances in
which the Soviets will take US conciliatoriness
as a sign of weakness.

~ 78, The Soviets will also attach great weight
to their assessment of developments in the
triangular relationship involving the US, China
and themselves. Their aim obviously will be,
in general, to prevent the two other sides of

 

the triangle from combining against the USSR,
and consequently Moscow may now believe
that it can no longer afford a serious confron-
tation with either of the other two parties,
This consideration now seems to give Moscow
an incentive to “normalize” its relations with
the US, but it will also have an incentive to
try to normalize relations with China to an
extent which will deny the US the leverage
which the Sino-Soviet conflict now gives it.
The longer term is therefore likely to see
shifts of emphasis in the USSR’s approach to
the US and China in accordance with its ap-
praisal of the balance at any given time and
its calculation of the comparative costs of
improved relations with either party.

79. Progress in talks on strategic arms limi-
tations, especially if a first-stage agreement
leads on to a broader stabilization of the US-
Soviet strategic relationship, may, by buttress-
ing the USSR’s sense of security, help to wear
away some of the USSR’s suspicion of US in-
tentions. These talks seem likely to be less
vulnerable to the influence of external factors
than other aspects of US-Soviet relations. But,
by the same token, a positive outcome in
SALT will not necessarily have a direct and
immediate impact on other areas of the rela-
tionship where the requirements of mutual
self-restraint may seem less urgent to Moscow.
Problems in other areas where the broad politi-
cal interests of both the USSR and the US are
deeply engaged may prove to be of a more
intractable sort. This may be true in Europe,
for example, where the Russians have an in-
terest in the kinds of agreements which con-
tribute to the security of the Soviet sphere
but not in a genuine European settlement so
long as they see a good chance of bringing
about changes to their advantage. Similarly,
in other areas their concern for the enhance-
ment of their world position is greater than
their interest in broad undertakings regulating
US-Soviet rivalry.

scr 29
Page-57
80. Negotiations with regard to control of
conventional arms will encounter additional
difficulties arising from the asymmetries in
the US and Soviet geographical positions and
force structures, as well as delicate questions
for both sides concerning the consequences of
any agreements for relations with allies and
friends. For these reasons, the US may find
it exceedingly difficult to obtain acceptable
terms from the Russians with respect to force
reductions in Central Europe, arms limita-
tions in the Middle East, or control of naval
deployments. Practice has shown, however,
that some military-related problems which are
largely bilateral in character are amenable
to solutions which help to reduce US-Soviet
friction. Understandings pertaining to ac-
tivities in space, the control of bacteriological
weapons, and incidents at sea are examples
of this kind.

Longer-Term Prospects

81. These observations are not meant to
suggest that we see the US facing a Soviet
Union which will be permanently intransigent
and unfulfilled in its international ambitions.
To say that the Soviet policy is at present in
a forward phase is not to say that it will re-
main so. There is much that is tentative and
experimental about this policy and it can be
questioned how long it can be sustained before
Moscow would be in danger of overextension.
As noted earlier, developments in Germany
or Eastern Europe could cause Moscow’s dé-
tente policy in Europe to founder. Conversely,
because of its economic needs and the pres-
sures generated by the Chinese problem, the
USSR may come to regard détente in Europe
as indispensable and worth the concessions
required to maintain it. The Soviets might, in
the same way, come to see the need for more
flexible forms of political, economic, and
military cooperation in Eastern Europe and

f

 

for a lowering of the barriers to communica-
tion between the states of Eastern and West-
ern Europe.

82. The USSR’s efforts to extend its’ pres-
ence and influence in the Third World will
come up against nationalist resistance and
will inevitably encounter a certain number of
setbacks. Limitations on Soviet resources will
also have a bearing on Soviet activity in the
Third World, especially if, as seems possible,
expenditures there in coming years yield di-
minishing political returns. Certain other de-
velopments of an essentially unpredictable
kind—a severe worsening of the Sino-Soviet
conflict, or a convulsion in the Soviet leader-
ship—could have an even more significant im-
pact on the direction of Soviet foreign policy.
But whether goals are altered or not, it can-
not suit the USSR, because of the complexity
of its interests, to have an uncontrolled inter-
national environment. Chances are that with
time and wider involvement, the USSR will
discover more frequently than hitherto a com-
mon interest with the US in containing some
of the causes of international tension and in
seeking the bases for limited accommodations.

 

83. Whether the future will bring a more
meaningful modification of the Soviet inter-
national outlook and behavior seems likely in
the end to depend on the USSR’s internal evo-
lution. And here the most crucial question
may be how the Soviet leaders deal with the
problems of adaptive change in their society—
particularly with the problem of economic
modernization: by minimal measures or by
serious reform. The entrenched and self-per-
petuating bureaucratic oligarchy now in
charge is resistant to change. Among the men
in the Politburo who now seem most likely to
take over from the aging Brezhnev, Kosygin,
and Podgorny, there may be some who will
eventually reveal reformist inclinations. But
such tendencies, if they exist, are not now in
evidence. The present Politburo is, by and

30 shes
Page-58
he

large, an Old Guard presiding over the preser-
vation of a system which must seem to its
members to have served the Soviet Union’s
and their own personal interests well. They
are disposed to change it as little as possible
and they will attempt to stimulate economic
growth and technological progress by resort-
ing to traditional methods of discipline and
persuasion supplemented by modest modifi-
cations of the economic structure and such
technical assistance from abroad as they can
obtain.

84. But, in view of the USSR’s ambitious
international goals, this may not be enough.
Confronted by economic frustrations and
faced, perhaps, by a growing cleavage between
itself and its educated elite, nationalist fer-
ment, and loss of popular élan, the regime
might move in the direction of severe repres-

sion. It is possible that repression would bring
on a general crisis of the system in which it
was recognized that the Party was no longer
capable of governing effectively. In these cir-
cumstances, the Soviet military might take on
the task of maintaining national unity. What
is perhaps more likely in such a situation is
that a new generation of Party leaders of a
more flexible disposition would begin to
emerge. Such men might see in the USSR’s
internal problems a cause for seeking greater
international tranquility and the elimination
of many of the sources of international tension.
They might, at the same time, be less ready
to respond to the old doctrinal shibboleths and
less inclined to see an incompatibility between
Soviet national interests and increased politi-
cal and economic stability in the international
order,

shor 31
Page-59
ANNEX

THE PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET-AMERICAN TRADE

ser

 

Lp: 23 484 blank
Page-60
THE PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET-AMERICAN TRADE

1. The Soviets have long resorted to the
import of Western equipment and technology
as a way of helping to compensate for their
technological lag vis-a-vis the developed West.
During the last Five Year Plan period (1966-
1970), Soviet imports of Western machinery
and equipment went up from a level of $560
million to $1.1 billion. Because there has been
a sharp upsurge in Soviet orders for Western
plant and equipment since the end of 1970,
it is expected that imports will continue at
this high level throughout the current Five
Year Plan period (1971-1975). Soviet needs
are particularly acute in the electronics, tele-
communications, chemical, oil, gas, and auto-
motive industries.

2. The USSR’s inability to generate suffi-
cient exports to pay for imports from the West
has caused it to suffer hard currency deficits
in almost every year of the past decade. In
1970, for example, Soviet imports from hard
currency countries, amounting to $2.7 billion,
exceeded exports by $500 million, Since 1966,
when the USSR stopped selling gold, Soviet
deficits have been financed in the main by
credits. As a result, Soviet long-term indebted-
ness has climbed rapidly, rising above $2 bil-
lion in 1971. The growth of this debt has also
led to a sharp increase in debt service charges
which now take up about one-fifth of the value
of Soviet hard currency earnings annually.

3. If this trend continues, the USSR will
have mortgaged a large share of its future
export earnings for debt service and its flexi-

bility in trade with the West will be reduced.
Recognizing this, the Russians have attempted
in recent trade negotiations to arrange that
payment for sought-after Western equipment
would be tied to deliveries of the products
from the. installations built with Western
credit. These efforts have produced gas-for-
pipe contracts with Austria, Italy, and West
Germany and a Soviet-Japanese wood-for-
equipment contract. A number of proposed
contracts are on the same order, among them
a gas-for-pipe deal with France, and oil-, coal-,
and gas-for-pipe deals with Japan.

4. It is estimated, however, that the growth
in Soviet exports to the developed West will
slow drastically in the 1970s, principally be-
cause of the short supply of Soviet products
saleable in the West, most notably oil. The
USSR thus will have to finance increased im-
ports by other means or ration its imports more
strictly. The USSR has added considerably to
its gold reserves since 1965 and now produces
more than $200 million in gold annually. There
are indications that the USSR may now be
willing to part with some of its gold to pay for
imports. If so, it could continue to import
more than it exports. But if the Soviets choose,
instead, to ration their imports more strictly,
imports of highly prized Western equipment
and technology will, nonetheless, be main-
tained to the extent possible, though there will
probably be greater emphasis on importing
technology rather than equipment. Although
consumer goods normally would be among the

sfx 35
Page-61
he

first to be reduced if imports are curtailed,
Soviet promises of improvement in the con-
sumer’s diet may limit Soviet options in this
sphere. Indeed, Kosygin has indicated that
the USSR is prepared to import 10-15 million
tons of feed grains from the US in the next
5 years, which would entail an outlay of $750
million to $1 billion.

5. The annual level of US-Soviet trade has
remained below $200 million. In 1970, this
trade represented only about 4 percent of East-
West trade turnover. The Soviet interest in
raising this level rests on both economic and
political factors: Moscow needs Western tech-
nology and equipment but it also wants the
US to demonstrate willingness to deal with it
in this area on equal, non-discriminatory terms.
The USSR for its part has indicated a read-
iness to resume discussions on outstanding
economic differences, e.g., the lend-lease debt.
The USSR wants to obtain from the US, on
the other hand, a relaxation of export controls,
government (Eximbank) guaranteed credits,
and most-favored-nation treatment on tariffs
for Soviet exports.

6. With the lowering of trade barriers, US
exports to the USSR could well increase from
the 1971 level of about $160 million to per-
haps $500-$600 million by 1975. The. bulk of
Soviet imports would be in the machinery and
equipment category. The USSR has made
known a long list of expensive capital equip-

ment it desires from the West—automotive
manufacturing, deep well drilling, automatic
oil transfer and storage, oil refining, rolling
mill, off-the-road vehicles, computers, instru-
ments, data transmission, and numerically con-
trolled machine tools—and it considers the
US equipment and technology in many of
these categories to be superior to all others.
Many of these Soviet needs thus might be pur-
chased from the US if credit terms can be ar-
ranged, although some will be purchased from
the US in any case.

7. Soviet imports would be considerably
in excess of exports and the USSR would still
have a large trade deficit just as at present. In
1971, US exports to the USSR exceeded im-
ports by about $100 million. By 1975 the US
surplus would be substantially higher because
most Soviet exports would not find a market
in the US for the next few years at least. Any
large orders from the US would lead to a
large increase in Soviet indebtedness. The
USSR’s ability to secure long-term credits
from the US will thus have a crucial bearing
on expansion of US-Soviet trade. Barter ar-
rangements would also mitigate the debt prob-
lem. Arrangements involving the repayment in
products for assistance in raw materials de-
velopment, such as those made with other
Western countries, are also being proposed to
the US and some may be concluded, e.g., the
proposed gas deal.

36 ser
Page-62
y

 

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the follow-
ing officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force
. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
|. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
- Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury, for the Department of the
Treasury
|. Director of Central Reference Service, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

TO ow

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Central Reference Service, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
|AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

A. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

 

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Department of the Treasury
Page-63
SECRET

Contg6lled Dissem

 

SE@RET