
Page-1
srr

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

SOVIET MILITARY AND CIVIL
AVIATION POLICIES

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
~ RELEASE IN FULL

ORE 19-48

Published on
23 APRIL 1948

COFY NO.78
FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
FOR REPORTS AND ESTIMATES
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

¢. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

j. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staft

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

  

WARNING

 
 
   
  

This document contains jon affecting the national

defense of the United
Page-3
SOVIET MILITARY AND CIVIL AVIATION POLICIES

FOREWORD

The studies contained in this volume were prepared at the request of the President's
Air Policy Commission.

In order to maintain uniformity in preparation, the information was collected on
the basis of questionnaires, copies of which are bound at the end of the volume. The
questionnaires may be opened at the side of the volume and used concurrently in ex-
amining the reports. Omission in a report of an item included in the questionnaires
indicates that the question was inapplicable or that satisfactory information is un-
available.

The two documents in this volume are based largely on data supplied from the
Office of the Director of Intelligence, USAF. This material has been supplemented by
additional information available to Central Intelligence Agency from other sources,
The opinions expressed in this study, therefore, are not necessarily the views of the
USAF.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
10 November 1947
Page-4
Cp. & ts blanky

 

 

 

fe

SOVIET MILITARY AIR POLICY

SUMMARY
AGENCIES INVOLVED IN MILITARY AIR POLICY

There are numerous agencies in the Soviet Union which participate in the formu-
lation and implementation of military air policy, the most important of which are the
Council of Ministers, the Ministry of Armed Forces, the Armed Forces General Staff,
the Main Administrations of the Soviet Air Force and the Soviet Navy, and the Civil Air
Fleet. The State Planning Commission and the Academy of Sciences of the USSR like-
wise exercise such functions, as also do a considerable number of the 58 ministries repre-
sented on the Council of Ministries. Since information as to the interrelationships
among agencies involved in military air policy is almost completely lacking, what follows
is primarily speculation.

Major policy decisions probably are made at the very top level, which would go
beyond the Council of Ministers into the Politburo itself. Once decision had been
reached in the Politburo, acceptance in the Council of Ministers would be a foregone
conclusion. Each ministry would make note of the requirements which affect its par-
ticular operations, so that such matters as production of aircraft, electronics equip-
ment, and any other materials needed by the air program could be included in the
plans which each ministry must submit to the State Planning Commission (GOSPLAN).
The GOSPLAN Commission is responsible for the preparation of quarterly, yearly, and
five-year plans and for the supervision of the fulfillment of the plans after their approval
by the Council of Ministers. This commission is believed to have a major role in imple-
menting military aviation policy.

The Academy of Sciences, in general, governs science and research, and undoubt-
edly is a major factor in the implementation of air policy with respect to the research
which must precede the development of new aircraft and related equipment.

Within the Ministry of Armed Forces, coordination of air policy with that of the
military program as a whole is probably handled by the Minister in council with his
deputies, who include the Chiefs of the Air Force, Ground Forces, Naval Forces, and Rear
Services, in addition to the Chief of the Armed Forces General Staff. This latter officer
functions as first deputy minister. In most respects, it is believed that the air arm
remains subordinate to the ground force high command.

RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF AIR IN NATIONAL DEFENSE

The Soviet high command appears to be putting principal reliance for defense on
the mass strength of ground armies, which means that the air force will continue to
have a major tactical role. During World War I the Soviet Air Force was organized
and employed as an instrument for direct and immediate support of the ground forces.
In this role, the air force was much larger and more important than the Soviet Navy,
but still far less important in Russian military thinking than were the ground armies.

3 cafe
‘
Page-5
CURRENT TRENDS WITHIN THE AIR FORCE

Within the air force itself, it is believed first Priority is being given to the develop-
ment of an interceptor fighter force based on jet aircraft, and second priority to creation
of an effective long-range bomber force.

MILITARY AIR IN FOREIGN RELATIONS

The Soviet Air Force has not been used in an “international” armed force in the
true sense, although as a measure of control in satellite countries such as Poland, the
occupying Soviet air units have operated with, but have always controlled, the satellite
units. The Soviet Union does not coordinate its staff planning with other nations,
nor did it do so with the Allies even during the war.

It is evident that the Soviets are exploiting to the maximum the aviation material
acquired during the war and as a result of their Occupation of Western Germany.
Skilled German personnel have been recruited by the USSR to further its postwar
program. The Soviet Union is in a position to take advantage of Swiss, Swedish, ana
Czech skills in the production of precision instruments. This is not to imply that the
Soviet Union is dependent upon outside sources for the materials needed to support
its air force. It will turn to these sources as necessary, however, while it improves its
own aeronautical industry.

FISCAL

With regard to preparation of the military air budget, the State Planning Com.
mission proposes the annual allocation of funds to the armed forces as a part of the
over-all allocation of funds and resources under the Five-Year Plan. A detailed annual
budget is prepared by the Minister of Finance under direction of the Council of Min-
isters for approval by the Supreme Soviet.

No information is available to indicate the extent to which expenditures for the
military establishment are borne by other ministries, but the fact that this is done
is inherent in the adjustment of the entire economy of the country to the requirements
of national defense.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

Research and development in the air force is carried out by the Chief Engineer of
the Soviet Air Force who directs these research institutes. One of these develops new
aircraft types and improvements on existing types, another is devoted to armament,
and the third to aircraft materials. Research in addition to that conducted within
the air force is controlled primarily by the Academy of Sciences, mentioned above. The
Academy, which includes numerous installations, is concerned principally with prob-
lems of theoretical research and basic science. In most cases developmental work is
turned over to the research institutes operated by the various industries, Emphasis on
the furtherance of jet, turboprop, and rocket engine design continues unabated, as do
research and production in the field of electronics.

 

 

 

cadbatial
Page-6
oxgfle

The Soviet aircraft industry is fully capable of building and maintaining a powerful
air force, given appropriate priorities. The industry is supported by a strong economy
which suffered substantially during the war, but which is fast recovering and will soon
begin to expand beyond its prewar dimensions, In the past, development of the indus-
try was hampered by inadequate supplies of aluminum. Soviet aluminum production
rose, however, from 60,000 metric tons in 1940 to 86,000 metric tons in 1945. The goal
of the Five-Year Plan is 172,000 metric tons in 1950.

ADEQUACY OF GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE IN MILITARY AIR POLICY
MATTERS

In commenting on the over-all efficiency of the governmental structure in the
establishment and implementation of military air policy, the absence of firm data re-
quires that conclusions be based on conjecture.

Efficiency is a relative term, and in comparison with the best of American standards
there are many aspects in which the Soviet governmental structure could be considered
inefficient. What is involved is the type of inefficiency inherent in any highly cen-
tralized government which discourages initiative and necessitates that many minor
as well as major decisions be made at the very top levels of government.

A highly centralized system of exercising governmental power gains in effectiveness,
however, since it can channelize the amount of effort necessary to gain any desired
objective. The decisions as to military air policy can be made in the Politburo, and
the handful of men responsible for such decisions are in a position to see that the entire
Soviet economy is organized to execute the Policy decided upon, should such prove
necessary.

While there may be considerable argument concerning the efficiency of the Soviet
system, there is less dispute concerning the effectiveness of the Soviet Union in imple-
menting its military air policy. The success with which the Soviet Air Force recovered
from the brink of annihilation during the early part of World War IL is evidence of this.
In the midst of combat, the Soviet Air Force reorganized, re-equipped, and developed
from a fighting force, which was markedly inferior to the German Air Force, to one
which, by the close of the war, was not only markedly superior in numbers but was
also fast approaching equal quality in both aircraft and crews.

Another indication of the effectiveness of the Soviet structure in the implementa-
tion of policy is the apparent success of a widespread program to develop and produce
operational] jet aircraft.

Soviet leaders demonstrated their ability to devise and adapt air policy to changing
circumstances during World War II.

Since the war, a reorganization of the armed services has given the air force a more
important position than it ever had previously, even though evidence to date does not
indicate that this has meant complete independence of the air arm from ground force
control.

Since 1945 the major operating problems facing Soviet air have changed materially.
In view of the present world situation and demonstrated wartime weaknesses of the

5 Ss

4
‘ , f
Page-7
Soviet Air Force, Soviet military air policy should be oriented around the tasks of
creating an interceptor force capable of coping with long-range strategic attack, and
the development of a long-range striking arm of its own. Solution of both of these
Problems currently is being given high Priority, it is believed, but the success achieved
Probably cannot be demonstrated by anything short of actual combat.
Page-8
MILITARY AVIATION POLICY

1. In general, the agencies of primary military interest are:
Council of Ministers
Ministry of Armed Forces
Armed Forces General Staff
Main Administration of Soviet Navy
Air Arms of the Soviet Naval Fleets
Civil Air Fleet
Main Administration of Soviet Air Force
Military Council
Tactical Air Armies
Military District Air Forces
18th Air Army
Air Force of the Airborne Forces
Fighter Air Defense Force

The State Planning Commission and the Academy of Sciences of the USSR exercise
functions which relate to military air Policy, as do also a considerable number of the
58 ministries represented on the Council of Ministries. To one degree or another, these
could include the ministries of:

Armaments

Aviation Industry

Chemical Industry

Communications

Communications Equipment Industry
Construction Materials

Light Industry

Machine and Instrument Construction
Machine Tools Construction

Material Reserves

Oil Industry, Eastern Regions
Transport

Construction of Military and Naval Enterprises
Electrical (Equipment) Industry
Heavy Machine Building

Internal Affairs

Labor Reserves

Oil Industry, Western and Southern Regions
Road and Construction Building
Rubber

State Security

Transport Machine Building
Page-9
f=

2. Information as to the interrelationships among agencies involved in the forma-
tion and implementation of military air policy is almost completely lacking, and what
follows is primarily Speculation.

Major policy decisions Probably are decided at the very top level, which would go
beyond the Council of Ministers into the Politburo itself. Once decision had been
reached in the Politburo, acceptance in the Council of Ministers would be a foregone
conclusion.

Each ministry would make note of the Tequirements which affected its Particular
operations, so that such matters as Production of aircraft, electronics equipment, con-

Within the Ministry of Armed Forces, coordination of air policy with that of the
military program as a whole Probably is handled by the Minister in council with his
deputies, who include the chiefs of the Air Force, Ground Forces, Naval Forces, and
Rear Services, plus the chief of the Armed Forces General Staff, This latter officer
functions as first deputy minister.

The scope of activities of the Armed Forces General Staff as regards military air
Policy is not known, but this staff, headed by its Chief of Staff, is responsible for over-
all planning and coordination within the Ministry of Armed Forces,

The Main Operations Administration of the Armed Forces General Staff is charged
with the final preparation of strategic plans before their submission to the Chief of
the General Staff and the Minister of Armed Forces, and thus is directly concerned
with air policy.

Other agencies of the Armed Forces General Staff, most of which may have some
relation to air policy are:

Main Intelligence Administration
Signal Communications Administration
Organization and Mobilization Administration
Fortified Areas Administration
Topographic Administration
Historical Administration
Eighth Administration (Coding and Decoding)
Affairs Administration
Within the Soviet Air Force the policy-making body is the Military Council,
which includes the Commander in Chief of the Soviet Air Force, his Chief of Staff, the
Chief of Rear Services, the Chief Engineer, and the Chief of the Political Administration.
The commander of the Naval Air Force is subordinate to the Commander in
Chief of the Soviet Navy, who is one of the deputy ministers of the Ministry of Armed
Forces. The generals commanding the air arms of the individual fleets are subordinate
to the commander of the respective fleets to which they are assigned, and also to the
Commander in Chief of the Naval Air Force, but information is lacking as to how these
relationships work out in practice.
Page-10
suo

7 The Academy of Sciences, in general, governs science and research, and un-
doubtedly is a major factor in the implementation of air policy with respect to the
research which must precede the development of new aircraft and related equipment.

. Economic mainsprings of the Soviet economy is the State Planning Commis-

sion (GOSPLAN). :

The Soviet Constitution of 1935 provides: “The economic life of the USSR is
determined and directed by a State Plan of national economy with the aim of increas-
ing the public wealth, of steadily raising the material and cultural standard of the
working people, and of strengthening the independence of the USSR and its capacity
for defense.”

The GOSPLAN commission has 11 members elected from among the leading
industrial workers, scientists, and specialists. Its task is to prepare quarterly, yearly
and five-year plans and present them for approval to the Council of Ministers; to super-
vise fulfillment of the plans and to work out solutions to the practical and methodo-
logical problems involved in economic planning. :

The principal task of thé commission is the coordination of the different
schemes and branches of the Soviet economy. While this commission has a major role
in implementing military aviation policy, its complicated organization of more than
40 departments and bureaus apparently handles the problems involved on a piecemeal
basis. There is a “Group of Aviotransport” in the “Department of Aviotransport and
Motor Transport,” but no other agency has “aviation”-in its-title, Presumably some
of the military air policy matters are considered in the “Mobilization Department.”

3. a. (1) Before and during World War II the Soviet Air Force was designed,
organized, and employed as an instrument for direct and immediate support of the
ground forces. In this role, the air force was much larger ‘and more important than
the Soviet Navy, ‘but still far less important in Russian military thinking than were
the ground armies. | /

a The Soviet high command still appears to be putting principal reliance
for defense on the mass strength of ground armies, which means the air force will con-
tinue to have a major tactical role. .

Within the air force itself, it is believed first Priority is being given
to the development of an interceptor fighter force based on jet aircraft, and second
priority to creation of an effective long-range bomber force. .

. (2).. The Soviet Air Force has not been used. in an “international” armed
force in the true sense, although as a measure of control in satellite countries such as ~
Poland, the occupying Soviet air units have operated with, but always controlling the
satellite units. ‘. 7

The stumbling block in the formation of the air portion of the UN
armed forces has been Soviet insistence on equal participation by each Security Council
member, an important consideration in view of China’s weakness and the current status
of the French Air Force. in a

The Soviet Union does not coordinate its staff planning with other
nations, nor did it do so with the Allies even during the war.
Page-11
5

 

The Soviet Union recently planned a major reorganization of Ru-
mania’s armed forces without bothering to advise the Rumanian general staff as to
what was in prospect.

The Soviet Air Force benefited to a major degree from foreign tech-
nical and material resources during World War II, not only from the thousands of air-

use, including the two flyable B-29’s which were interned in 1944,

The USSR obtained much that can be put to advantageous use as the
Tesult of its occupation of Eastern Germany. Captured items included new develop-
mental and prototype models with which the Germans were experimenting, as well as
research centers and aviation plants. Large numbers of skilled German aviation
scientists, engineers, and technicians have been recruited by the USSR to further its
postwar program.

and Czech skills in the production of precision instruments required by the air force.

and enlarge the petroleum industry.

It is not to be implied from the above that the Soviet Union is de-
Pendent upon outside sources for the materials needed to support its air force. The
Soviet Union will turn to outside sources as necessary, however, while it improves its
own aeronautical industry.

The Soviet Union does not release any of its air designs to foreign
nations, but it has a policy of equipping satellite countries with Russian aircraft,
usually older models. The Yugoslav Air Force, however, has some of the newest of
Soviet aircraft, which may indicate that the USSR is willing to Provide effective support
for an air force which is considered “thoroughly reliable,”

There is no indication to date that Soviet aircraft are being manu-
factured in any of the satellite countries, except a few YAK’s in Yugoslavia.

b. (1) On 25 February 1946, the People’s Commissariat of Defense and the
People’s Commissariat of the Navy were combined in the People’s Commissariat of the
Armed Forces—which later was designated the Ministry of Armed Forces. As part
of the reorganization it appears that the air, ground, navy, and rear services were given
coequal administrative status. Prior to this, the Soviet Army Air Force had been
subordinate to the ground forces, and each of the four major fleets of the Soviet Navy
had its own fleet air arm.

During the balance of 1946 it became apparent that the Civil Air
Fleet had been divorced from military control, directly responsible to the Ministry of
Armed Forces, or, possibly, to the Council of Ministers itself.

There is still no positive evidence that the Soviet Air Force actually
has achieved coequal status with the ground or naval forces. The air force may have

10
Page-12
sacl

been granted some measures of autonomy, such as in the field of research and develop-
ment, but it is believed that in most respects the air arm remains subordinate to the
ground force high command.

The Naval Air Force continues to be an integral part of each of the
four Soviet fleets —Pacific, Arctic, Baltic, and Black Sea,

(2) Since the air force, ground forces, and navy are all part of the Min-
istry of Armed Forces, it can be assumed that a measure of top-level coordination of
air policy matters is achieved either among the deputy ministers or the Armed Forces
General Staff.

Within the Soviet Air Force the Military Council is the advisory
and policy-making body, but it has no naval air force representation.

The Soviet Navy has no aircraft carriers, and, for the most part, the
Naval Air Force uses the same type equipment and has the same type organization as
does the Soviet Air Force. Most of the Soviet naval air effort in World War II was ex-
pended in joint operation with the Soviet Air Force in tactical engagements with the
German Army and German Air Force. It is believed, however, that an expanded role
is in prospect for the Naval Air Force.

(3) As of 1 September 1947, the Soviet Air Forces included an estimated
450,000 personnel and 14,000 aircraft in operational units, of which 1,000 were noncom-
bat types.

A total of 5,100 aircraft are stationed in Europe, outside the USSR;
1,150 in Korea and Manchuria; and 7,750 within the USSR, of which an estimated 1,150
are in the Far East.

The air strength is estimated to include 6,000 fighter types, 4,000
ground attack aircraft, and 3,000 bombers. These are divided by major command as
follows:

Tactical Air Armies and Military 9,000 aircraft
District Air Forces

18th Air Army (Long Range Force) 1,750 aircraft

. Fighter Defense Force (PVO) 1,600 aircraft

Naval Air Force 1,650 aircraft

(4) No specific information is available to indicate that the USSR has
a system of air training similar to that of the US Air National Guard and Air Reserves,
Since a compulsory tour of service in the Armed Forces by all physically qualified men
is a continuing Soviet military policy, the need for such a comprehensive reserve train-
ing program is partially removed. Nothing is known of refresher courses given to
demobilized air force personnel for maintaining their military proficiency. In all prob-
ability there is some form of refresher training.

Indications are that a considerable number of former military pilots
are currently working for the Osoaviakhim (Society for the Promotion of Aviation and
Chemistry), an important subdivision of which is the Aero Club organization,

Details of the training given Civil Air Fleet personnel are not known,
but the quality of training of flying personnel is thought to be the best in the Soviet
Union.

&

11 SE
Page-13
¢. (1) No specific answer to this question is Possible because it is impossible
to calculate the national income of the USSR in comparative monetary terms; because

money which is spent on the military; and because no data are available to indicate
what proportion of the armed Services budget allocation is Spent for military air.

In general, the 1947 Soviet budget, in billions of rubles, is as follows:

Planned state revenue 391.5

Planned state expenditures 371.4
National Economy 131.8
Social-cultural 107.1
Ministry of Armed Forces 67.0
Maintaining governmental organs 12.8
Payment on government loans 6.9
Scientific research institutions 6.5
Unaccounted for 39.3

When the 39.3 billion rubles unaccounted for in the expenditures
budget are added to the 20.1 billion rubles surplus of planned Tevenues over planned
expenditures, and the 18.6 billion rubles surplus of 1946, the USSR has a total of 78
billion rubles — more than the published budget for the Ministry of Armed Forces
— for uses concerning which no information is available.

The Russian ruble has an “official” exchange of 5.3 to the US dollar,
but the diplomatic rate is 12 rubles to the dollar. Both of these figures are purely
arbitrary, as the ruble is not used in foreign exchange and thus its international value

Sold in Soviet stores, it is estimated that the consumer's ruble is worth about 2 cents, or
50 to the dollar. Purchasing power of rubles expended by the government is considered
to be much greater than the purchasing power of those Spent by individuals, since the
government is able to set cost prices on the materials it buys.

Basically, of course, the entire matter is a bookkeeping Proposition,
since the government pays a man his salary whether he is a metal worker in an aircraft
plant or a sergeant in the air forces,

Decisions with respect to expenditures can be made on the basis of
national policy without regard to monetary costs. The desired Goals, plus availability
of skilled workers and the necessary materials, are the important factors — not the
bookkeeping “costs.” Or, as the Soviets would put it, the public interest rather than
cost or profit, is the guiding criterion.

(4) All funds for civilian research, educational institutions, and the avia-
tion industry are provided by the government.

(5) The State Planning Commission, which coordinates the Planned de-
velopment of the economy of the Soviet Union, Proposes the annual allocation of funds
to the armed forces as a part of the over-all allocation of funds and resources under
the Five-Year Plan. A detailed annual budget is prepared by the Minister of Finance
under the direction of the Council of Ministers and is approved by the Supreme Soviet.

%
S,
SEG 12
Page-14
The funds as provided by the budget are made available by the Min-
ister of Finance to the Minister of Armed Forces. Within the Ministry of Armed Forces,
the Chief of the Main Finance Administration of the Armed Forces handles all fiscal
matters.

 

No information is available to indicate the extent to which expendi-
tures for the military establishment are borne by other ministries, but the fact that
this is done is inherent in the adjustment of the entire economy of the USSR to the
requirements of national defense.

Within the Soviet Air Force, the Main Administration of Rear Services
(GUT) is charged with the administration of finance, as well as supply and construction.
Within the GUT is a Finance Administration responsible for the payment of personnel
and for the budget of supplies and materials used by the Soviet Air Force.

It may well be that the air force budget originally is worked out by
the Finance Administration of GUT, then analyzed and approved by the Military Council
of the Soviet Air Force, after which it is submitted to the Ministry of Armed Forces for
approval and forwarding to the State Planning Commission.

d. (1) The Chief Engineer of the Soviet Air Force, one of five members of
the Military Council of the Air Force, directs three research institutes through the
Main Administration of Engineer Service (GUIAS). These are:

Scientific Research Institute of the Soviet Air Force, which conducts
research for development of new aircraft types and for improve-
ment of existing types.

Scientific Research Institute for Aircraft Armament.

Scientific Research Institute for Aircraft Materials.

The Chief Engineer also is responsible for an Inventions Administra-
tion, which inspects and studies inventions submitted to the Soviet Air Force, and
maintains a construction bureau and experimental workshop for developmental work.
Within the Administration of Repair Service is a Scientific Experimental Institute of
Aircraft Repairs, which serves both the field repair and major repairs departments, and
a Department for Research and Introduction of New Repair Methods.

; No information is available to indicate whether the Soviet Navy con-
ducts any research and development in military aviation.

For the most part, the Naval Air Force has employed aircraft of the
same models and type as those utilized by the Soviet Air Force. It may thus be that
development of new types and other research has been left largely to the Soviet Air Force.

(2) ‘In order to answer this question it is necessary to examine the general
organization of research in the Soviet Union.

: Because of the centralized nature of the government of the USSR,
it is possible that fixing of priorities between research on different problems of military
significance may be resolved at the very highest level, perhaps even in the Politburo.

For most purposes, however, the controlling agency is the Academy of
Sciences of. the USSR, which is responsible for drafting a five-year plan listing the
most important scientific problems to be solved. For each problem there is listed its
history, its present status, proof of its importance to the national economy, a list of

5
13 SE
Page-15
of '

subproblems which must first be solved in order to further solution of the basic prob-
lem, and the names of the scientists charged with working out this problem.

The Academy of Sciences, which includes more than 40 scientific insti-
tutes, plus a large number of commissions, laboratories, societies, museums, and
libraries, is concerned primarily with problems of theoretical research and basic science.
It handles some of the problems in its own institutes, while others are assigned to re-
searchers in the institutions of higher learning.

In some instances, the Academy of Sciences carries the results of its
experimentation through the developmental stage, but in many cases the developmental
work as well as the actual testing is turned over to the research institutes operated
by the various ministries.

The Ministry of Aviation Industry, for instance, has several institutes
for aviation research and development. It is believed that these institutes are responsi-
ble for the technological work necessary to develop practical application of the results of
research conducted under direction of the Academy of Sciences.

: Research institutes of the aircraft industry can be divided into five
categories. In the first category are the principal scientific research institutes. These
include, in addition to the institutes of the Soviet Air Force already mentioned, the
following:

Central Aero-Hydro-Dynamic Institute (TsAGI), which deals with
all questions of aircraft design (air frames and engines) especially from an aerodynamic
point of view. It has an experimental factory attached to it and claims to have one of
the world’s largest wind tunnels.

Central Aircraft Engine Institute (TsIAM)

Soviet Union Aircraft Building Material Institute (VIAM), which
studies materials for air frames and engines. It may be closely associated with, or per-
haps the same agency as the Scientific Research Institute for Aircraft Materials of the
Soviet Air Force. :

Scientific Research Institute of the Civil Air Fleet (NiiGVF). There
are additional institutes dealing with such problems as instrument construction, labor
utilization in factories, etc.

In the second category are the experimental design bureaus directed
by the principal Soviet aircraft designers — Lt. Gen. Uyushin, Lt. Gen, Yakovlev, Major
General Lavochkin, and Major General Tupolev. Aero-engine design bureaus are di-
rected by such engine designers as Major Gen. Mikulin, Major Gen. Shvetsov and Major
Gen. Klimov.

The research laboratories attached to the higher aviation training
establishments, such as the Moscow Aviation Institute, compose the third category.

Every large aviation factory has an experimental laboratory. These
laboratories vary in size and importance, but together they comprise the fourth category.

The fifth category includes other research institutes, principal func-
tion of which is to modify and perfect existing basic aircraft models. There have been
ten modifications, for instance, of the YAK-9. These research institutes also design

SE 14
Page-16
th

and turn out, in small experimental series, new aircraft types for series production when
and as the industry can accept them,

A “Bistrop” Commission is reported to be the supreme Soviet organi-
zation in Germany on matters of scientific research, the evacuation of technicians and
scientists, and the further development of V-weapons. This commission is under charge
of a major general and probably represents a coordinated effort. No information is
available as to which Soviet ministry or research agency controls the “Bistrop” Com-
mission,

(3) Considering the type of political and economic organization which
exists in the Soviet Union, there is no purely private research and development.

(4) With the possible exception of fundamental research in institutions
of higher learning, it is believed that centralized control in this field is complete. Gen-
eral priorities probably are laid down by the highest authority.

The Academy of Sciences determines priorities in basic and theoretical
research. Priorities for development of new models and equipment probably are rec-
ommended by the Ministry of Armed Forces and issued as orders by higher authority
to the various industrial ministries concerned.

e. (1) Firm data on this subject are lacking, but some evidence is provided
by the recent appearances of jet aircraft in the Soviet Air Force. One jet fighter was
seen in the August 1946 Moscow Air Show, and 100 jet fighters of two types performed
in the May Day parade of 1947. Considering that the one seen in August 1946 was a
prototype, the Soviet Union went into production rapidly, and immediately began to
equip its fighter regiments with jet aircraft.

On the basis of World War II experience, once the first experimental
aircraft had been produced, the time taken to prepare it for the state test, and, therefore,
for series production, was usually fairly short. The average time for fighters was from
three to six months and for bombers from five to ten months, In the case of the YAK-3,
for instance, there was an interval of one and a half months from the production of the
first experimental aircraft to its state test, then an interval of three months until the
production of the first series. With the IL-10, six or seven months elapsed between the
Production of the first experimental aircraft and that of the first series. In the case
of the TU-29 and ER-4 aircraft, however, production of each of these twin-engine
bombers was held up for many months because of engine difficulties.

A considerable number of Soviet air regiments currently are believed
to be operating with obsolete or obsolescent aircraft, long after improved types are
known to have been developed. This may be a matter of Policy rather than necessity,
however, since there is evidence to indicate the Soviet Union tends to build reserves of
its more modern types, withholding them from Operational use while older models are
being used by tactical units. This Policy was noted on occasion in the closing period of
World War I.

(2) The Soviet aircraft industry is fully capable of building and maintain-
ing a powerful air force. The industry is supported by a strong economy which suf-
fered substantially during the war, but which is fast recovering and will soon begin to
expand beyond its prewar dimensions, The USSR possesses sufficient skilled man-

15 oft:
£ ,
Page-17
power, materials, and equipment to satisfy the requirements of the aircraft industry a
a high rate of operation over an extended period, given appropriate priorities.

Estimated total aircraft production in the USSR between 1938 am
1946 is compared with US production below:

USSR us
1938 6,000 3,623
1939 9,000 5,856
1940 12,000 12,781
1941 14,796 26,134
1942 25,622 48,858
1943 37,079 85,946
1944 39,926 96,369
1945 34,200 47,713
1946 16,500 1,728*

* Military aircraft and commercial transport types (DC-3 and larger) only, Total US output i:
1946 was 36,482, broken down as follows: Military, 1,643; commercial transport, 139; two-seate
planes, 30,604; 3- and 4-place planes, 3,756; 5- to 10-place planes, 340.

During the war years combat types represented about 85% of tote
aircraft output in the USSR.

In the past, development of the Soviet aircraft industry was hampere:
by inadequate supplies of aluminum. Lend-lease aluminum was an important facto
in Soviet wartime aircraft production. Soviet production of aluminum was 60,00:
metric tons in 1940, 86,000 metric tons in 1945, and the goal of the Five-Year Plan i
172,000 metric tons in 1950.

Considering the planned expansion of aluminum capacity and th:
possibility of employing substitute materials, it is believed that, if a wartime productio1
program were begun today, the Soviet Union could manufacture aircraft at the rat:
of 50,000 to 55,000 a year in 1950, assuming the same composition of output as existe:
at the close of World War II.

(3) Procurement is considered to be centralized to a marked degree.

Control and planning of all Soviet Air Force activities, including thos:
relating to logistics, are vested in the Commander in Chief of the Soviet Air Force, who i:
chairman of the Military Council, composed of chiefs of the major administrations o
the Soviet Air Force.

The Main Administration of Rear Services of Soviet Air Force head
quarters probably obtains all standard supplies from the major command known as
Rear Services, which has the same organizational position as the army, air force, anc
navy under the Ministry of Armed Forces. The air force is believed to deal with thc
Main Administration of Intendance in Rear Services headquarters on matters of quar
termaster supply.

Definite information is lacking, but it is possible that the Soviet Ai:
Force deals directly with the various production ministries for procurement of purely
air equipment, including aircraft and engines.

shape 16
Page-18
a
sugihle
4

During the past war, the Soviet Air Force maintained two types of
centralized rear-area stores: Special Air Force Stores, which were stocked with aircraft
engines, spare parts, ammunition, and other types of specialized equipment used solely
by air force units, and General Stores, from which the air force was supplied with food,
clothing, and other nonspecialized supplies.

No information is available to indicate the extent to which Air Armies
or Military District Air Forces may be authorized to obtain certain supplies on a local
basis. Considering transportation difficulties, local supplies are obtained where possi-
ble, but it is considered that the administrative work connected with such procurement
still may be quite centralized.

fj. (1) The USSR is convinced of the highly important part played by train-
ing in the development and sustained operation of an efficient air force. The quality
of air training has been low in comparison with US standards because of a certain
amount of lag behind the Western Powers in development and utilization of the highly
technical aspects of an air power. However, this situation is showing signs of steady
improvement. Confirmed reports indicate that the Soviets are using German military
and technical personnel as advisers and instructors in the use of captured German
equipment.

The Soviet air training system at the close of the war conformed
substantially to that of the other major powers. By far its outstanding quality is its
flexibility. This quality will prove most valuable now that the Soviet Air Force, and
thus its training program, must be designed for possible future war.

Compared with the Western Powers, flying training in the Soviet Air
Force is weakest in the techniques of bad-weather flying, aerial gunnery, formation
flying, and high-level precision bombing. Soviet training is probably Stronger in
operations under poor field conditions, although this has, in the past at least, probably
been due to necessity rather than design. It is significant that the Soviets have demon-
strated the ability to accomplish much under highly adverse conditions.

Among service schools concerned with military aviation are two Acad-
emies of the General Staff, three branch air academies, three higher military schools
(for advanced pilot training), and seven officer candidate schools which cover pilot
training, technical specialties, and aerial reconnaissance.

(2) Paramilitary training, as exemplified by that conducted in the “Aero
Clubs,” seems to be as vigorous as it was before the war. Aero Clubs formed, prior to
the war, the most important subdivision of the Osoaviakhim (Society for the Promo-
tion of Aviation and Chemistry). Outwardly, this is an independent civil body, but it is
actually paramilitary in nature. Practically all candidates for Aero Club membership
come from the industrial working class and are members of the KOMSOMOL (Commu-
nist Youth Organization).

(3) “Izvestiya,” 13 September 1947, announced the opening in Moscow
of a new high-level aviation academy with three departments: Aircraft, power plants,
and instruments. The list of faculty members included Ilyushin, Klimov, Lavochkin,
Nikoyan, Tupolev, Yakovlev, and Zhukovsky. Students qualified to take the training
at this academy must be college graduates with seven years’ experience in the aviation

j
& 17 . nf
Page-19
fer '

industry, including at least two years in executive positions. The faculty members
are top-flight aircraft and engine designers of the USSR. The caliber of these men,
plus the impressive entrance requirements, indicate that the Soviet Union is planning
an intensive campaign to improve the civilian element of the aviation industry. This
may indicate further intensified effort on the part of the Russians to improve both
design and production methods in the Soviet aviation industry.

g. (1) Some indication of the degree to which the USSR emphasizes secu-
rity is given by two decrees promulgated in June 1947 by the Supreme Soviet providing
punishments for the disclosure of any Soviet state secrets—military, scientific, eco-
nomic, or political.

The prescribed penalties, confinement in labor correction camps for
varying periods, are more severe for responsible citizens than for ordinary Soviet citizens.

Among information classified by the decrees as “state secrets” are:
Any facts or figures concerning the size, strength, or dispersal of armed forces or
reserves; plans concerning exports or imports of certain goods; production of nonferrous
and rare metals and earths; “information concerning negotiations, relations, and
agreements of the USSR with foreign states,” and advances “in all spheres of science.
technology, and national economy.”

Disclosure of any of this information by officials in circumstances that
“cannot be qualified as treason to the motherland or espionage is punishable by impris-
onment in a labor concentration camp for a period of 8 to 12 years,” the decree said.

Betrayal of military secrets by servicemen, if not treason, is punish-
able by imprisonment of 10 to 20 years, while ordinary citizens disclosing state secrets
may be punished by labor camp terms of 5 to 10 years. Disclosure of scientific data
can lead to a term of 10 to 15 years.

“State secrets” are defined so broadly that it would appear that these
decrees—coupled with the activities of the secret police—provide a comprehensive pro-
gram for protection of the security of military data and the results of research and
development.

4. Since data on these subjects are almost completely lacking, any answer can be
little more than conjecture.

Efficiency is a relative term, and in comparison with the best of American
standards there are many aspects in which the Soviet governmental structure could
be considered inefficient. What is involved is the type of inefficiency inherent in any
highly centralized government which discourages initiative and necessitates that many
minor as well as major decisions be made at the very top levels of government.

A highly centralized system of exercising governmental power gains in effective-
ness, however, since it can channelize the amount of effort necessary to gain any desired
objective.

The decisions as to military air policy can be made in the Politburo, and
the handful of men responsible for such decisions are in a position to see that the
entire Soviet economy is organized to execute the policy decided upon, should such
prove necessary.

  

fe :
Page-20
gle
+

*

While there may be considerable argument concerning the efficiency of the
Soviet system, there is less dispute concerning the effectiveness of the Soviet Union in
implementing its military air policy. The success with which the Soviet Air Force
recovered from the brink of annihilation during the early part of World War II is evi-
dence of this. In the midst of combat, the Soviet Air Force reorganized, re-equipped,
and developed from a fighting force, which was markedly inferior to the German Air
Force, to one which, by the close of the war, was not only markedly superior in numbers
but was also fast approaching equal quality in both aircraft and crews.

Another indication of the effectiveness of the Soviet structure in the implemen-
tation of policy is the apparent success of a widespread program to develop and produce
operational jet aircraft.

Soviet leaders demonstrated their ability to devise and adopt air policy to meet
changing circumstances during World War I. .

Since the war, a reorganization of the armed services has given the air force
a more important position than it ever had previously, even though evidence to date
does not indicate this has meant complete independence of the air arm from the ground
force control.

Since 1945 the major operating problems facing Soviet military aviation have
changed materially. In view of the present world situation and demonstrated wartime
weakniesses of the Soviet Air Force, Soviet military air policy should be oriented around
the tasks of creating an interceptor force capable of coping with long-range strategic
attack, and the development of a long-range striking arm of its own. Solution of both
of these problems currently is being given high priority, it is believed, but the success
achieved probably cannot be demonstrated by anything short of actual combat.

There is no basis for a discussion of “economical use of funds,” both
because of lack of detailed information on “expenditures,” and because the Soviet
economy is not based on “money” in the conventional sense.
Page-21
Tt" ‘
CIVIL AIR POLICY

 

 

 

 

USSR
7
if

Poticy i
1

POLITBURO ] [ COUNCIL of MINISTERS |
Probably decides major
policy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ACADEMY of SCIENCES

Over-all direction
of
scientific research

STATE PLANNING COMMISSION
(GOSPLAN)

eS

Dept. of Aviotransport
and Motor Transport

i
{
1
PLANKING

 

 

 

 

   
    
 
 

 

  

Group Aviotransport

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IMPLEMENTATION : '

 

OSOAVIAKHIM f
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTION OF MINISTRY of AVIATICN

     
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AVIATION AND CHEMISTRY TST DUSTRY
of Responsible for
Promotes air clubs as ARMED PORCES Production of
paramilitary activity aircraft
oe

 

   

ARMED FORCES {
GEN'L STAFF !

MAIN ADMINISTRATION
CIVIL AIR PLEET

 
  
 
 

 
   

:

|

se i

Issues permits MAIN ADM. SOVIET i
Controls air routes AIR FORCE i

Services, repairs a/c
Directs research
Controls training

  
    
 

 

NAVY,

    

AIR FORCE of

i
|
MAIN ADM. SOVIET p
i
!
f
AIRBORNE FORCES |
Page-22
HE

CIVIL AVIATION POLICY

A. Crvit Arr Pouicies.

1. Basic policy of the USSR as regards civil aviation is to create a large and effi-
cient air transport system, which will not only enable rapid communication among
widely separated sections of the Soviet Union and with satellite countries, but will also
act as a reserve organization ready to augment Soviet military air power. Soviet basic
air policy, furthermore, sacrifices the development of world-wide air transport opera-
tions to the immediate military and civil needs within the USSR. Determination of
policy and complete control of all civil aviation are vested in the government. Govern-
ment control is effected through three independent organizations, each controlling some
aspect of Soviet nonmilitary aviation. These organizations are:

Upravleniye Grazhdanskovo Vozcushnovo Flota (JGVE — Main Administra-
tion of the Civil Air Fleet) under the Minister of Armed Forces;

Central Soviet Council of the Osoaviakhim (Society for the Promotion of
Aviation and Chemistry) ;

Main Administration of the Glev Sevmorput (Main Administration of the
Northern Sea Route).

The use of Soviet civil aviation as an instrument of national policy is evident in
many ways. One typical example is provided by the postwar civil air agreements be-
tween the USSR and the Soviet satellite countries. (A discussion of these agreements
is contained in the reply to question A.3.h. of this report.)

2. The Soviet Government controls all aspects of civil aviation.

a. The government plans and controls the development and expansion of
scheduled air transport. The Fourth Five-Year Plan calls for 175,000 kilometers (108,
900 statute miles) of air routes by 1950 (an increase of approximately 25% over 1940).
The most important lines are to be equipped for year-round and night flying. Sixteen
airports will be reconstructed for use by heavy high-speed planes. Twenty air stations
are to be built or rebuilt. The Chief of the Civil Air Fleet has announced that an
attempt will be made to increase passenger and freight traffic within the next two or
three years to eight to ten times the prewar figure. It is estimated that in 1940 civil
aviation had a turnover performance of 34,000,000 ton-kilometers (21,150,000 ton-miles),
carried 49,000 metric tons of freight and baggage and 309,000 passengers. This would
indicate an annual goal for the near future of more than 300,000,000 ton-kilometers
(186,500,000 ton-miles), nearly 500,000 tons of freight and baggage, and approximately
3,000,000 passengers.

b. Control of nonscheduled air transport is maintained by the government
through all three civil aviation organizations. The small aircraft units of the various
ministries, which perform nonscheduled operations, are detailed to these various minis-
tries from the UGVF and the Osoaviakhim and are considered to be actually a part of
their parent organizations. The majority of the air operations undertaken by the
Northern Sea Route are probably nonscheduled in character.

21 S)
*
Page-23
he

c. Private flying, as it is known in the US, is nonexistent in the USSR. There
is, however, a system of flying clubs controlled by the Osoaviakhim, which might be
compared with the Civilian Pilot Training Program of the US.

d. All aircraft manufacturing in the Soviet Union is controlled by the Ministry
of Aviation Industry. A certain amount of supervisory control of the aircraft industry
is also maintained by the Ministry of Armed Forces, State Planning Commission, and
Academy of Sciences, and the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet. The degree
and scope of the control exerted by these agencies, however, is unknown. The in-
dustry, which had expanded to the maximum possible degree during World War I,
has gone through a period of readjustment. The industry has probably reduced its
production quantitatively and is now operating at peacetime levels. The design and
production of large and medium-size air transports is progressing.

e. Anextensive research program is quite evidently in progress. Large num-
bers of German scientists and technicians, together with German research facilities,
have been integrated in this program. The program is directed by the leading Soviet
scientists. There is evidence of emphasis on jet and rocket propulsion. (Eight differ-
ent postwar types of jet aircraft have been identified.) Principal control of all basic
scientific research in the Soviet Union rests with the Academy of Sciences. This organ-
ization is responsible for formulating the Five-Year Plan as it affects scientific research.
(In addition, the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet is specifically charged with
the development of all nonmilitary aircraft, and has its own aeronautical research in-
stitute.) The Academy of Sciences is also responsible for determining the relative
priority of all scientific development. A considerable amount of this research actually
is carried out by the research institutes of the Ministry of Aircraft Industry. Aeronau-
tical research is also carried out by institutes subordinate to the Ministry of Armed
Forces.

f. Aeronautical engineering education is probably controlled by the Ministry
of Higher Education.

g. The training of pilots and technicians for the GVF is undertaken in schools
of the Civil Air Fleet. The following list shows the location of Civil Air Fleet Schools
in 1944. It is not known whether all these schools are now in operation.

Location of Civil Air Fleet Schools in 1944.

Alma Ata Kupino

Baku Moscow
Khabarovsk Moscow-Pushkino
Dzhizak Novosibirsk
Frunze Penza

Gorki Sterlitamak
Issyk-Kul Sverdlovsk
Syr-Darinskaya Tashkent

Training of foreigners is limited to those of proven “political reliability”
from the Soviet satellite countries.

5,

Ss 22
Page-24
‘

oy:

h. Control of all export and import trade is exercised by the Soviet Govern-
ment through the Ministry of Foreign Trade, which coordinates this activity with the
State Planning Commission and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Imports are of two
types: (1) standard electronic equipment for use in aerial navigation is required in
quantity and obtained under trade treaties; and (2) advanced models of aircraft and
power units are required in limited quantity for experimental purposes: they are ob-
tained under individual contracts. Export of aeronautical equipment is extremely
limited. Transport aircraft and spare parts have been authorized for export only to
the dependent satellite countries and only in negligible quantities.

i&j. The government controls and promotes the development of all airports
and air navigational facilities. An ambitious program of airport construction, includ-
ing the installation of navigational aids, is contained in the current Soviet Five-Year
Plan. (See subparagraph a.) Most of the airports of the Soviet Union are controlled
by the military forces; however, there are airfields of a purely nonmilitary nature which
are controlled by the Civil Air Fleet, Osoaviakhim, and the Northern Sea Route. Air
navigation facilities are believed to be a primary responsibility of the Main Administra-
tion of the Civil Air Fleet. Some navigation facilities may be controlled by the Soviet
Air Force and the Soviet Naval Air Force, but the extent of these holdings is not known.
The Main Administration of the Northern Sea Route undoubtedly is responsible for
the air navigation facilities in the Arctic regions.

3. a. All aircraft in the Soviet Union are owned by the government. Primary
air carrier in the Soviet Union is the Civil Air Fleet, which operates the majority of the
scheduled air lines. In addition, there is the Main Administration of the Northern Sea
Route which operates some scheduled, but for the most part nonscheduled, flights in
the Arctic regions. There is no competition between these two organizations and the
USSR can be considered to have one government-owned air carrier. No foreign capital
is invested, except in air lines jointly owned by the USSR and certain foreign countries.
These include the Soviet-Rumanian air line TARS, the Soviet-Hungarian air line Mazov-
let, the Soviet-Yugoslav air line JUSTA, and the Sino-Soviet Aviation Corporation.
None of these joint air lines, however, operates within the USSR.

b. The aircraft industry of the Soviet Union is government owned and directed.
Control of this industry is maintained through the Ministry of the Aviation Industry.

c. No competition exists between the UGVF and the Administration of the
Northern Sea Route.

d. Complete protection of Soviet civil aviation is afforded by prohibiting
entry of foreign air lines into the USSR. A Soviet air policy in the satellite countries,
however, involves relations with other countries, The joint Soviet-satellite air lines,
while not permitted to operate into the USSR, have been authorized to seek air agree-
ments with air lines of certain Western countries and to exchange services on a restric-
ted or flight-for-flight basis with such countries.

e. As Soviet civil aviation is government owned, operating expenses are pro-
vided and income is absorbed by the government. It is probable, however, that the
air lines are not operated at a loss, since salaries paid employees are low and facilities

23. SE
Page-25
x
SEQRET

provided are far below US (Western) standards. Flight frequencies are regulated to
insure full loads and fares charged (twice as much as those for rail travel) are high
enough to cover operating costs. Ordinary passengers are required to buy their trans-
portation for cash and the cost of travel for officials traveling on government business
is charged to the agency they represent. Soviet policy since the end of World War II
has been to promote actively all phases of civil aviation. The current Soviet Five-Year
Plan includes objectives to be met in the production of new aircraft, construction and
improvements of airports, and airport facilities, and the training of pilots, navigators,
and technicians in night and instrument flying. The plan also calls for an extension
of the domestic air network to approximately 110,000 route miles (a 27% increase over
prewar mileage). This ambitious program has been adopted in order to link remote
areas of economic importance to the main traffic arteries and to further the realiza-
tion of the Five-Year Plan as a whole.

f. The Soviet objective is to replace its obsolete transport aircraft with modern
types comparable to the postwar types produced by the US. A new twin-engine air-
plane (IL-12) has appeared and is destined to replace the lend-lease and Soviet built
DC-3’s, while two four-engine transports (IL-18) and (TU-29) have been built which
have characteristics of the DC-4 and the B-29. These aircraft, which have not yet
appeared in quantity, are intended for service on the main trunk lines throughout the
USSR. The development of all aircraft is controlled by the government, primarily
through the Ministry of Aviation Industry; though some phases may be supervised by
the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet.

g. Foreign transport aircraft in use by the USSR, as far as known, consists
principally of large numbers of US lend-leased DC-3’s. While Soviet representatives
have visited US aircraft manufacturers and expressed interest in purchasing a number
of Constellations, no firm orders have been placed since Soviet policy is to effect such
purchases only through the medium of a comprehensive trade treaty, and the US has
indicated that a settlement of the US-USSR lend-lease account is the prerequisite to
such an agreement.

h. Soviet policy requires that all foreign air lines be excluded from Soviet
territory in the interest of national security. On the other hand, the USSR has been
instrumental in organizing, equipping, and controlling civil air lines in Rumania,
Hungary, and Yugoslavia, and in aiding the reestablishment of the prewar Polish air
line. This has been undertaken (a) in order to impose a continuing Soviet control
over air communications in areas contiguous to the USSR, and (b) by promoting inter-
locking air agreements between these satellite countries to stimulate trade and to en-
courage political and economic integration.

Soviet bilateral air agreements permitting Soviet air access into other coun-
tries are unilateral in application, as foreign air lines are not permitted to enter the
USSR. When the USSR encounters opposition to this type of agreement by a country
with which it desires air relations, a point is selected in a nearby country to which both
parties have access for an exchange of traffic on mutually agreed terms.

While Soviet policy requires scrupulous observance by foreign air lines of
Soviet territorial integrity, the USSR nevertheless permitted its own air lines to operate

és
Ss. ET 24
5)
Page-26
sips

an illicit commercial service in northern Iran after the withdrawal of Soviet troops. This
operation was terminated only recently following a formal protest from the Iranian Gov-
ernment. Another example of indifference to the rights of other countries is apparent
in the present organization of the Sino-Soviet air line. The formation of this air line
in 1939 resulted from a Sino-Soviet agreement providing for a jointly owned monopoly
of air services between a point in the USSR and Sinkiang Province, China.

In practice, however, the company appears to be completely dominated by
the USSR with a single Chinese holding the title of Chairman of the Board, but lacking
any authority. Chinese pleas for company reorganization to give China a fair share
in the air line have gone unanswered.

The USSR has entered into no multilateral air agreements and is not likely
to do so in the foreseeable future except on terms consonant with Soviet national policy.
Although a seat on the ICAO Council has been held in reserve for the USSR since for-
mation of this organization, the USSR has declined membership. This is quite un-
derstandable, for present Soviet air policy would not permit the USSR to comply with
ICAO principles or regulations.

4. Soviet civil air policy is definitely influenced by military air requirements. The
reorganization of Russia’s military forces in 1946 is believed to have placed the Main
Administration of the Civil Air Fleet under the Ministry of Armed Forces. In this po-
sition, it is independent of the Soviet Air Force and Soviet Naval Air Force, but remains
under the control of the military authorities.

Soviet civil air transport is certainly regarded as a military air asset. It is
equally important in time of peace as an essential transport service, and a commercial
activity of economic and political value. For this reason, Soviet civil air transport does
more than merely justify the maintenance of a manufacturing industry.

5. The purely internal civil air policy of the USSR is in no way influenced by any
foreign country. For the most part the international air policy of the USSR is also not
affected by foreign influences, but the increasing resistance encountered by the USSR
and Soviet satellites in their attempts to negotiate air agreements with nonsatellite
countries is definitely affecting the implementation of Soviet policy. Western Euro-
pean countries have refused to sign air agreements with satellite countries and the
USSR, which do not provide reciprocal rights.

6. No detailed information is available on this subject. The budget for civil air
is, however, believed to be included in that of the Ministry of Armed Forces, since this
agency controls the UGVF.

7. See par. 4.

8. All institutions of higher education, including those dealing with aeronautics,
are believed to be operated or controlled by the Ministry of Higher Education. Political
indoctrination undoubtedly holds a high place in the list of subjects. The formation of
a high-level aviation academy, to be located near Moscow, has recently been reported.
The faculty list includes almost all the important aircraft and aircraft-engine designers
of the USSR.

25 SE
Page-27
*

SEQRET ‘

9. The government owns and operates its own aeronautical research and develop-
ment facilities. Government control of these facilities is maintained through the Acad-
emy of Sciences, Ministry of Aircraft Industry, and the Ministry of Armed Forces. Al-
though there is no specific information, it is known that the government program is
extensive. At present the greatest emphasis is believed to be centered on jet fighters,
long-range bombers, and long-range heavy transports. This view is supported by the
new aircraft seen at the recent Aviation Day and May Day air shows. Believed to be
of secondary importance is the development of radar and other ancillary equipment.
The degree of latitude given to research is not known. Control of theoretical research
is maintained through the Academy of Sciences, which allocates the priority on all basic
projects. Control of development research in aeronautics is probably vested in the
Ministry of Aircraft Industry and the Ministry of Armed Forces. Under the political
and economic system which exists in the Soviet Union, freedom of private research, in
the Western sense, does not exist.

10. Complete control of aircraft development, including financing of manufactur-
ing facilities, is vested in the government through the Ministry of Aircraft Industry.

Certain factories of the aircraft industry are believed to have research facilities
.which are carrying out development projects, but the majority of the factory research
is believed to be restricted to the development of new and better production methods.

B. Crviy Arr ORGANIZATIONS.

1. Inall, there are 58 ministries in the Soviet Government, and nearly all of these
ministries are to some degree interested in civil aviation. The degree of interest varies
from those ministries which merely use civil aircraft for passenger travel and freight
transportation to that of the Ministry of Armed Forces, which actually has complete
control of the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet. Governmental agencies and
ministries which have a substantial interest in Russian civil aviation are believed to be
as follows:

State Planning Commission.
Council of Ministers
Academy of Sciences
Ministry of Aviation Industry
Ministry of Armed Forces
Armed Forces General Staff
Main Administration of the Soviet Air Force
Main Administration of the Soviet Navy
Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet
Air Force of the Airborne Forces
Main Administration of the Northern Sea Route
Osoaviakhim

S) ET 26
Page-28
SE

To a lesser degree the following agencies and ministries have interests in Russian
civil air:
Ministry of Construction Materials
Ministry of Communications
Ministry of Higher Education
Ministry of Heavy Machine Building
Ministry of Machine and Instrument Construction
Ministry of Oil Industry, Eastern Regions
Ministry of State Security
Ministry of Transport
Main Administration of the Combined Sea and Land and Meteorological
Service
Ministry of Foreign Trade
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Military and Naval Enterprises
Ministry of Electrical (Equipment) Industry
Ministry of Light Industry
Ministry of Machine Tool Construction
Ministry of Road and Construction Machine Building
Ministry of Transport Machine Building
2. Only a partial answer can be given this question. Answers given are incomplete
and are based, in general, on deduction rather than on definite information.

Politburo — Major policy decisions affecting Soviet civil aviation are probably
decided at.the very top level in the Politburo, which, although not an actual part of the
Soviet Government structure, is the Communist Party organ for the direction of the
government. Acceptance of Politburo policy is a foregone conclusion.

Council of Ministers — This body is responsible for the implementation of the
over-all policy of the USSR, which includes civil aviation. Major policy decisions are
given this organ by the Politburo.

State Planning Commission (GOSPLAN) — The economic mainspring of the
Soviet economy is the State Planning Commission, which has 11 members, elected from
among the leading industrial workers, scientists, and specialists. Its task is to prepare
quarterly, yearly, and five-year plans, and present them for approval to the Council of
Ministers; to supervise fulfillment of the plan, and to submit solutions for the practical
and methodological problems involved in economic planning.

Principal work of the Commission is to coordinate the various plans with the
numerous branches of Soviet economy involved.

While this Commission has a major role in implementing military and civil air
policy, its complicated organization of more than 40 departments and bureaus apparently
handles its problems on a piecemeal basis. There is a “Group aviotransport” in the
“Department of Aviotransport and Motor Transport,” which apparently has a major
interest in the development of civil aviation.

Academy of Sciences — This organization is responsible for the over-all direc-
tion of scientific research in the Soviet Union. In the fulfillment of this mission, the

a
27 SE

.

=
Page-29
*
ey
SE

Academy of Sciences must to a certain degree direct the development of civil aircraft.
Just how much control this organization exerts on the scientific institutes of the Aircraft
Industry and the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet is not known.

Ministry of Aviation Industry — This organization is responsible for the pro-
duction of all aircraft in the Soviet Union. Considerable liaison obviously exists be-
tween the aircraft industry and the Academy of Science, the Soviet Air Force, Soviet
Naval Air Force, and the Civil Air Fleet. The exact degree of control exercised by the
Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet over the Ministry of Aircraft Industry is not
known.

Ministry of Armed Forces — This is the ministry to which the Main Adminis-
tration of the Civil Air Fleet is believed to be subordinated. It is, therefore, probably
responsible for general over-all supervision and control of the Civil Air Fleet.

Armed Forces General Staff —This body is responsible for military planning
for the Ministry of Armed Forces, of which the Civil Air Fleet is a part.

Main Administration of the Soviet Air Force — Although this agency does not
have direct control of the Civil Air Fleet, it does to a certain degree influence UGVF
policy. Just how this influence is effected is not known. During the last war the
Soviet Air Force (then the Red Army Air Force) had control of the GVF to the extent
that directives as to the use of UGVF units could be given the Chief of the Civil Air
Fleet by the Chief of the 18th Air Army (then designated the Long Range Force).
Civil Air Fleet personnel could be withdrawn for use in the 18th Air Army.

Main Administration of the Soviet Navy—This body influences UGVF policy
to a certain degree but UGVF units are not known to have been subordinated to the
Navy. Navy interest in the Civil Air Fleet is probably centered in the Naval Air Force.

Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet (UGVF)—Although there are three
agencies responsible for Soviet civil aviation, the Main Administration of the Civil Air
Fleet is the chief motivating agency. It is the largest of the three and is actually re-
sponsible for the implementation of Soviet civil air policy.

The organization of the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet is not
known in detail, but it is believed to be similar to the organization of the Main Adminis-
tration of the Soviet Air Force. The following directorates of administration are known
to exist:

Political

Technical Matters
Repairs

Construction

Foreign Lines

Medical

Cadres

Inspector

Legal

Editing and Publishing
A scientific research institute

28
Page-30
we
The UGVF is specifically charged with the following:
Control of servicing, repair, and spare parts for all aircraft of the UGVF;
Control of all air routes;
Survey, planning, and construction of new routes and airfields;
Direction of operations with economic objectives;
Planning future developments;
Direction of research and developmental work in civil flying;
Control of equipment and technical training;
Registration of aircraft;
Issue of permits to use civil aircraft;
Issue of permits for flights outside the Soviet Union;
Ratification of construction programs of subordinate territorial directorates;
Control of experiments in new types of transport aircraft, engines, balloons,
gliders, and the organization of series production of nonmilitary aircraft
on government order, including technical control of special productive
activity;
Organization of necessary signal communications;
Direction of training for flying and technical ground personnel;
Organization of medical services;
Organization of fire-fighting services;
Control of matters involving foreign air traffic.

Air Force of the Airborne Forces — This organization is a part of the Soviet
Air Force. As the name indicates, it is responsible for the planning and execution
of all Soviet airborne operations. In the performance of its duties in war time, the
Air Force of the Airborne Forces must draw some of its aircraft from the UGVF. The
exact extent of liaison in peace time is not known, but a close tie is undoubtedly main-
tained.

Administration of the Northern Sea Route — This organization is one of the
three independent organizations within the Soviet Union concerned with civil aviation.
It employs civil aircraft for ice reconnaissance and exploration of the Arctic region. In
addition, it is responsible for air transport throughout the Soviet Arctic. While sepa-
rate from the UGVF, it must operate closely with the Civil Air Fleet, and the UGVF
is believed to be responsible for the general direction of its over-all Policy as well as
inspection of Northern Sea Route aircraft.

Osoaviakhim (Society for the Promotion of Aviation and Chemistry) — This
organization is the third organization which is considered to have a primary interest
in civil aviation. The Osoaviakhim has its own aircraft, which are used by aero clubs
for private fiying, or rather the nearest approach to such activity, in the Soviet Union.
The Osoaviakhim can be considered a paramilitary organization for the promotion of
flying among Soviet youngsters before they are of military age.

3. This question is not believed applicable to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Gov-
ernment controls and operates all civil aviation and extragovernmental opinions on the
adequacy of civil aviation or its relation to the public interest would have no material
Page-31
sf: :

influence on civil air administration. An objective analysis of Soviet civil aviation, how-
ever, clearly indicates that it is inefficient in many respects. It can only be said to
serve the public interest within the Communist concept of this purpose.

4. From the standpoint of the known and probable functions of these many
agencies concerned with civil air, it appears that considerable overlapping and duplica-
tion exist. The resulting conflicts are probably solved by the State Planning Com-
mission, the Academy of Sciences, or the Council of Ministers. If settlement cannot
be effected at this level, the problem is probably referred to the Politburo for decision.

C. Procepures AND REGULATIONS.

1, Air Routes.

These questions are generally inapplicable to Soviet civil air. The entire civil
aviation program is a government monopoly. No competition between carriers for
air routes can exist. The decision to inaugurate a new air route could possibly arise
in a number of agencies, such as the Sfate Planning Commission, Ministry of Armed
Forces, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Council of Ministers, or in the Main Administration
of the Civil Air Fleet itself. Any new air route would probably have to be approved
by the State Planning Commission, but the actual implementation of this policy de-
cision would be the responsibility of the Main Administration of the Civil Air Fleet.

2. Rates.

a. All rates on Soviet civil air lines are fixed by the UGVF, and thus are fixed
by the government. At the official exchange rate of 20 cents per ruble, rates on Aeroflot
are approximately double the US commercial air-line rates of 5.1 cents per mile. If the
so-called “diplomatic rate” of exchange is used (12 rubles per dollar) Soviet rates are
comparable to US domestic rates.

Both the above exchange rates are purely arbitrary, as the ruble is not
used in foreign exchange; therefore, its international value is undetermined. On the
basis of prices which Soviet citizens must pay for imported goods sold in Soviet stores,
it is estimated the consumer’s ruble is worth about 2 cents. Purchasing power of rubles
expended by the government is considered to be much greater than the purchasing
power of those spent by individuals, since the government is able to set cost prices on
the materials which it buys. In view of the above, it is impossible to compare realis-
tically rates on Soviet air lines with US commercial rates, since the comparison would
be based on a nonexistent international exchange rate of the ruble.

b. Rates are believed to be based primarily on economic considerations; how-
ever, political factors sometimes affect rates. During the operation of the illicit air line
in Iran, for example, rate-cutting tactics were employed in an attempt to force the
government-owned Iranian Air Lines into bankruptcy.

d. No specific information is available on this subject. There is not believed
to be any such thing as a discriminatory rate policy as such. High ranking members of
the Communist Party, government, and armed forces, however, are believed to have
priority in riding UGVF aircraft. These individuals are not believed to pay money for

 

a 30
Page-32
2

their passage, although the cost is probably charged to the government agency which
the travelers represent. It is also probable that the USSR occasionally grants prefer-
ential rates to individuals or groups of workers, in order to capitalize on the propaganda
value of such paternalism. How the bookkeeping is handled is of little importance,
since the government in any case pays for the operation of civil air lines.

3. Safety.

a. Although no specific information is available regarding safety regulations,
it is probable that whatever regulations are in effect are issued by the Main Adminis-
tration of the Civil Air Fleet. Responsibility for enforcement probably is delegated to
the Inspectorate of the Main Administration of the GVF.

b. According to numerous foreigners who have traveled in Soviet aircraft,
the regulations are either inadequate or are not enforced. Because in the USSR orders
of the state are usually strictly enforced with punishment for violations, it is believed
that adequate safety regulations have not been promulgated. A complete ignorance of
scientific loading (such as lashing cargo in the aircraft prior to take-off) is evident.
It is definitely known that Soviet authorities are alarmed at the accident rate of USSR
aircraft.

4. Inspection.

a. The following is a summary of the types of inspections laid down in air
force regulations. As it is believed that UGVF regulations are similar, this digest Ppro-
vides a possible indication of Civil Air Fleet directives on the subject. .

Preflight Inspection—Al aircraft to be inspected before flight by the aircraft
mechanic, technician, and crew. The flight technician to examine at least two aircraft
daily, chosen at random. The regimental engineer and armament and special equip-
ment engineer to inspect at least fifteen aircraft monthly, chosen at random.

Interflight Inspection—tIn cases of repeated operations, to be carried out by

the crews and ground technical personnel.
: Inspection after Landing—(Considered the most important since all defi-
ciencies and damage occurring during flight need to be established.) To be carried out
by technical crew members and technical ground personnel under the supervision of the
squadron technical officer.

Periodic Inspection—To be carried out only in units in rear areas, in flying
schools and training establishments. In front-line formations only regulation jobs
are to be done, the period of which is laid down in instructions for technical mainte-
nance of the different types of aircraft.

Inspection of Aircraft and Engines which Have Reached Regulation Limit
of their Life or Become Unusable because of Damage—(The purpose of this inspection is
to determine whether the aircraft in question, on the basis of its actual condition, is
still capable of further use.) The degree of repair to be established as well as the
necessity for transfer to a maintenance unit. It is also to be decided whether the
aircraft should be rejected. For the purpose of such inspections a commission, with
the regimental engineer as chairman, is to be established by regimental order. When

a
es 5 31 angle
Page-33
the examination has revealed that the aircraft, despite the lapse of regulation number
of flying hours, is still not in need of repair, the commission has authority to prolong
the regulation overhaul period of an aircraft by 30% and of an engine by 20%. This
decision, however, must be confirmed by the Chief .Engineer of the Air Army.

b. If the above listing of inspections is complete, it is apparent that Soviet
directives on this subject would be considered inadequate by US standards.

c. See b.

5. Airports and Communications.

a, Aircraft of the Civil Air Fleet appear to use either military or civil airfields.
There are, however, airfields in the Soviet Union that support strictly civil activity.

b, These airfields are operated and maintained by the three Soviet civil air
organizations.

D. GENERAL EVALUATION.

1. Despite the paucity of detailed information, it seems clear that the civil air
policies of the USSR are closely geared to the economic capacities, political aims, and
military requirements of the country.

It is reasonable to conclude that Soviet planning for civil aviation is farsighted
and well conceived, but that the implementation of this leaves much to be desired.
While the future will see a considerable expansion of Soviet civil aviation, this develop-
ment probably will fall short of planning estimates.

2. The principal points of strength in Soviet civil aviation can be summed up as
follows: (a) adequate manufacturing facilities to satisfy aircraft production needs of
the expanding domestic air network; (b) a large war-trained reserve of pilots and tech-
nicians upon which to draw as need arises; (c) training establishments for new per-
sonnel, refresher courses and technical schools for advanced training adequate to meet
Soviet standards; and (d) finally, perhaps the greatest source of strength, the ability
inherent in the Soviet system of control to allocate skills and direct available resources
solely toward the objectives of Communist national policy.

Serious weaknesses, however, characterize the Soviet civil air establishment.
These are: (a) lack of experience in commercial operating techniques as practiced by
the leading Western air carriers, which results in poorly executed scheduled operations
with low safety standards; (b) lack of experience in long-range operations; (c) lack of
sufficient modern aids to navigation (such as electronic equipment required for night
flying and bad weather operations) for general use; (d) lack of trained operators for
such equipment, resulting in reduced operating efficiency; and (e) obsolete equipment
still in use over most of the Soviet air network.

There undoubtedly lies, in the vast extent and regional isolation of the Soviet
Union, a challenge and a compelling incentive to Soviet civil aviation. The widely
dispersed, yet economically important population centers, together with a deficient sur-
face transportation system, present an obvious mission for civil aviation, and explain
the high priority given to it in the Fourth Five-Year Plan.

voy 32 sughr
Page-34
suger

QUESTIONNAIRE ON MILITARY AVIATION

To BE USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH THIS STUDY

PROBLEM:
1. To list all governmental agencies and other organizations which participate in
the formulation and implementation of policy concerning military aviation.*
2. To analyze, for each agency:
a. Exact functions pertaining to military aviation,
b. Motivating circumstances under which these responsibilities were originally
assigned or assumed (this is not applicable in all cases),
c. Degree of adequacy with which the responsibilities have been discharged,
d. Extent of duplication or overlapping of functions with other agencies,
e. Conflicts, if any, which have arisen out of (d), and the success in resolving
such conflicts,
fj. Machinery for lateral coordination with other agencies, with a statement
of its effectiveness.
3. To analyze Soviet policy with respect to military aviation, as well as the machin-
ery for establishing and implementing it, from the following points of view:
a. Over-all national considerations:
(1) Strategic doctrine on the importance of military air in national
defense, both (a) absolute and (b) relative to ground and naval arms.
(2) Military air in foreign relations, including:
(a) Its use in international armed forces (UN),
(b) Coordination of staff planning with other nations,
(c) Its dependence on foreign technical and material resources,
(d) The release of military. air designs or equipment to foreign
nations.
b. Armed forces (to be covered very briefly) :
(1) Degree of independence of air arms from ground and naval forces,
(2) Extent of integration of naval and military air policy,
(3) Proportionate distribution of air strength between home command
and overseas (between main areas),
(4) | Organization of air reserve and role of civil aviation in the air reserve.
¢c. Fiscal:
(1) Proportion of national income allocated to military air,
(2) Proportion of total budget of the armed forces allocated to military air,
(3) Proportion of military air appropriations allocated to operational
units, training, procurement, research and development, etc.,
(4) Subsidization (direct and indirect) of civilian research, educational
institutions, and the aviation industry,

—_
* Military aviation in the sense of this study includes the naval air arm.

33 sift
Page-35
fo

(5) Agencies responsible for preparation and presentation of the military
air budget.
d. Research and development:
(1) Extent of research and development carried out by the armed forces,
and degree of interservice coordination in this activity,
(2) Extent of government-sponsored or supported research and develop-
ment in the field of military aviation,
(3) Extent of purely private research and development in the field of
military aviation,
(4) Extent of centralized control in the establishment of priorities for
research and development.
e, Procurement and production:
(1) Speed with which operational units are re-equipped with newly de-
veloped types of equipment,
(2) Capability of aircraft industry to expand for production on wartime
basis,
(3) Degree of centralized control of procurement.
fj. Training and specialized education:
(1) Service schools,
(2) Participation by the military in the aeronautical education of civilians,
(3) Use of civilian educational institutions for the training of military
specialists.
g. Security:
(1) Measures employed to protect the security of (a) classified military
data which must be revealed to civilian agencies and private industry,
and (b) the results of private research and development.

4. To determine whether the present governmental structure is able to establish
and implement military air policy with:
a, Efficiency and effectiveness,
b. Rapid adaptability to changed circumstances,
¢. Economical use of funds.
Page-36
QUESTIONNAIRE ON CIVIL AVIATION
TO BE USED IN CONJUNCTION WITH THIS STUDY

L AiR POLICIES.

What are the basic policies of the country with regard to civil aviation? Is
civil aviation regarded as an instrument of national policy? To what degree
does the state determine policy with respect to it?

To what extent, by what means, and for what reasons does the government
promote (or restrict) the development and expansion of (a) scheduled air trans-
port, (b) nonscheduled air transport, (c) private flying, (d) aircraft manu-
facturing, (e) research, (f) aeronautical engineering education, (g) the train-
ing of pilots and other technicians, including grants to foreigners, (h) export
and import of aeronautical equipment, (i) airports, (j) air navigation facilities.

Indicate policies, and reasons therefor, with regard to:

a. Ownership of air carriers: Is private or government ownership favored, and

for what reasons? Are foreigners permitted to own controlling or minor

interests?

Ownership of aircraft manufacturing industry;

Competition among national carriers;

Protection of national air lines against competition with foreign carriers;

Subsidization of air carriers, manufacturing, airports, education, and

training;

f. Development of transport aircraft;

g. Use of foreign transport aircraft;

hk, Operations of foreign air lines, bilateral and multilateral agreements, inter-
national organizations. 7

sae

Is civil air policy influenced by military air requirements? To what extent do
the armed forces control civil aviation? Is civil air transport regarded pri-
marily as (a) a reinforcement of the military air potential, (b) a justification
for the maintenance of a manufacturing industry, or (c) a commercial activity
of economic and political value? If the answer is (c), to what extent do (a)
and (b) receive consideration?

How are the country’s civil air policies related to or influenced by those of
other countries? Is the country closely associated with, or dominated by, any
foreign power in matters of civil aviation?

What are the current government and private expenditures for each of the
activities mentioned in (2), and what is the relationship of these expenditures
to (a) the national income, (b) the national budget, and (c) the military air
budget?

354 suffer
Page-37
srgftr

What vested interests exert influence on civil air policy and what is the nature
of such influence? Are any agencies of the government dominated by these
interests?

Does the government sponsor, control, or subsidize aeronautical education? If
so, does it operate or control the institutions in which the education is given?
Is the number of students determined by the government, or left to the ini-
tiative of the students themselves? To what extent are the students self-sup-
porting or supported by the government? What is the total enrollment in such
studies? On what phases of aeronautical education does the government lay
greatest emphasis? What is the situation with respect to aeronautical engi-
neering education specifically from the foregoing points of view?

Does the government operate its own aeronautical research and development
facilities, or subsidize private organizations? How extensive a research pro-
gram does the government support? How much money is appropriated for
such purposes? Are such appropriations increasing? To what phases
of aeronautical research is greatest emphasis given? To what extent do pri-
vate institutions engage in aeronautical research on their own initiative?

. Is the development of new types of aircraft and equipment by manufacturers
subsidized or financed by the government? If So, what control does the gov-
ernment have over manufacturers, and in what manner is the financial aid
granted? To what extent do manufacturers engage in research on their own
initiative?

viL AIR ORGANIZATIONS.

List all agencies of the government concerned with civil aviation, including

legislative and judicial, as well as executive and military agencies, and agencies

connected with manufacturing, research and scientific development, exports

and trade, Procurement, education, training, airports and communications,

and appropriations, as well as agencies related directly to scheduled and non-

scheduled air transport and private flying.

a. Describe the functions of each of these agencies as they relate to civil
aviation.

bd. Indicate when and by what legislative or administrative actions these
agencies came into being.

¢. Indicate the reasons for the establishment of civil air agencies in the man-
ner in which they are now organized, and the circumstances under which
civil air functions were assigned to, or assumed by agencies not directly or
exclusively concerned with civil aviation. Show the influence of historical,
political, and economic conditions and of vested interests (private, official,
military) on the determination of the existing organizational structures,
and indicate the reasons for the abandonment or revision of previously
existing organizations.

To what extent are each of these agencies considered to be fulfilling a useful

function efficiently and in the public interest, or the contrary, by (a) aviation

36 suger

A
Page-38
sigs

interests, (b) competitive forms of transportation, (c) political parties, (d) the
armed forces, and (e) the general public?

To what extent do these agencies duplicate or overlap each other? How are
resulting conflicts resolved? Are their activities coordinated on a higher level
by any central group?

Is any consideration being given at present to abolishing, reorganizing, or com-
bining existing agencies, or creating new ones? If so, what are the objectives
of such proposed changes?

PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS.

1,

 

Air routes.

a. What agency (if any) awards particular air routes to designated carriers?

b. What considerations determine the granting of a route to a particular

carrier?

What conditions are imposed on the carrier in the operation of the route?

d. What freedom do carriers have to determine the routes they will or will not
operate?

e. Are new routes established on the initiative of the government or the

carrier?

Are all carriers entitled to apply for any proposed new route?

g. Is competition permitted over identical or similar routes?

hk. Under what circumstances can the carrier’s certificate be revoked or
revised?

Rates.

a. Are rates fixed by the government or the carriers?

b. Are rates based on economic, competitive, political, or social considerations?

c. If rates are fixed by the government, what procedures and methods are fol-
lowed, and by what agencies?

d. Are discriminatory rates permitted among carriers, or among classes of
travelers or freight?

Safety.

a. How and by what agencies are rules and regulations concerning safety
issued and enforced?

b. Are such regulations adequate? Are they competently and strictly en-
forced?

c. Are safety regulations enforced impartially, or are they used as a means of
showing favoritism to certain carriers?

Inspection.

a, What regulations and procedures govern the inspection of equipment, per-
sonnel, and accidents?

b. Are these regulations adequate? By whom, and to what degree are they
enforced?

ec. What penalties are imposed for failure to obey regulations?

37 suf
7

°

~
Page-39
Airports and Communications.
a. What regulations govern the use of airports?
b. What organizations operate airports?
c. What procedures are followed with regard to communications?
d. What organizations operate the communications systems?
Reports and Forms.
For the purpose of administering civil air policies, enforcing regulations, grant-
ing financial aid, and assuring adequacy, safety, and efficiency of operations,
what types of periodic or special reports, examinations, or forms does the gov-
ernment require concerning:
Trafic;
Expenses, revenues, and rates;
Educational standards and accomplishments;
Research activities and technical development;
Physical and mental condition of pilots and other employees;
Technical qualifications of pilots and other employees;
Aircraft flight operations (including required meteorological reporting) ;
Aircraft inspections;
Accidents;
Others.
To what agencies are the reports submitted? How are they processed and
what uses are made of them?

Sn rasp Aeon

3ENERAL EVALUATION.

l. Are the government’s civil air organizations, policies, rules, and procedures
generally considered to be sound, progressive, equitable, honestly administered,
and well adapted to the capacities, aims, and requirements of the country’s com-
merce, industry, and security? If there are marked differences of opinion in
this regard, what is the nature of, and the reasons for disagreement?

2. What are the principal points of strength and weakness in civil aviation? To
what extent are they due to conditions over which the country has no control,
or to conditions for which the government and/or industry are responsible?

38 syle
Page-40
DISTRIBUTION

‘The President :
Secretary of Btate 7
Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief
Secretary of Defense
Secretary of the Army
Becretary of the Navy
Secretary of the Air Force
Executive Secretary, National Security Council .
* Chairman, National Security Resources Board
Chief of Staff, US Army
Chief of Naval Operations
Chief of Staff, US Air Force
Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, US Army
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations)
Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Research and Intelligence
Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army
Chief of Naval Intelligence
Director of Intelligence, US Air Force
Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff
Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group
Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission
Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission
Chief, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State
Page-41
U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
2386—8—1948,