
Page-1
NiE 14-7-67
28 September 1967

 

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-7-67

Soviet Foreign Policy

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL; =.”

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleat
28 September 1967

Authenticated:

CUTIVE SECRETAR' 1B

CRE

esi N°? 588
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence

Mr, Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State

Vice Adm. Vernon L. Lowrance, for the Director, Defense Intelligence Agoncy
Dr. Louis W. Tordella, for the Director, National Security Agency
Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy

Commission
Abstainin,

Mr, William ©. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the subject being outside of his jurisdiction.

 

    
  

within the meaning of the espionage

mission or revelation of which in manner to\an unauthorized person is prohibited,

ROUP.

Ton omoatic
B ond

SMEcstion
Page-3
pant Mas Geen
appre for release through

the HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM of

the Central Intelligence Agency.

Date bY (44

me 4h

offer

CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM .....--------0502 0200000 cece eee tee eee te eens 1
SUMMARY .......-.- coded deen beret beets eee n eee e eee tte ene e see 1
DISCUSSION ....-..---5-5+2500> lo leeechesteeteete ©
I. THE POST-KHRUSHCHEV RECORD . cence ene n ete nent 3

Il. FOREIGN POLICY AND THE LEADERSHIP ......-.-----+005 205° 5
IIL CURRENT ISSUES OF POLICY ........-. 0-2 20-s0sretrertrrtrrt 8
Page-4
segfer

SOVIET FOREIGN POLICY

THE PROBLEM

To examine recent trends in Soviet foreign policy and their bearing
on the situation within the Soviet leadership, and to estimate the course
of the USSR’s policies over the next year or two.

SUMMARY

A. The Soviets have registered no really significant foreign policy
success in recent years. It is true that there has been an increase of
their influence in certain areas, especially in states on the USSR’s south-
ern periphery and in the Middle East, and that they have been able to
make some progress in the pursuit of their aims in Western Europe.
But Sino-Soviet relations have continued to deteriorate, the trend to-
ward declining Soviet authority in the Communist world has not
abated, and Soviet policy in the Third World has met with few particu-
lar triumphs and has encountered a number of setbacks.

B. The present collective leadership has survived for three years
and no early return to one-man rule seems in prospect. We do believe,
however, that there are persistent disagreements within high coun-
cils. Some of these involve domestic issues, such as the problem of.
resource allocation and of relations between the political and military
leaderships, which have an important bearing on the USSR’s inter-
national position. Others sometimes arise directly from questions of
foreign policy, such as Soviet conduct during the 1967 crisis in the
Middle East.

C. The Soviet leaders have not outgrown a dogmatic attitude that
the world should conform to the Soviet image of it, but their foreign
policies often reflect an understanding that there are definite limits
to their ability to shape and exploit the course of international events.
We believe that this ambivalence will persist for some time and will be

sffic 1
Page-5
segfer

evident in the way in which the Soviet leaders grapple, or fail to
grapple, with the issues of Soviet foreign policy. Toward the US, for
example, it will probably be evident in the USSR’s anxiety to avoid
crises which could lead to a confrontation, but, at the same time, its
disinclination to seek a significant improvement of relations, its re-
luctance to accept extensive arms control and disarmament measures,
‘and its probable refusal to try to bring any real pressure on Hanoi to
modify its terms for a settlement in Vietnam. Elsewhere, it is likely
to be evident in a prudent approath to China, ambiguous policies in
the Arab States, and an active though wary campaign to expand Soviet
influence in the Third World.

2 segher
Page-6
SEQRET

DISCUSSION

1. The present period of Soviet history has assumed much of the character
of a stable but uninspiring interregnum. No single figure has been able to
dominate the political scene as Khrushchev once did, and the country has had
to function without the kind of forceful direction of policy that such a figure
can provide. The present leaders, repudiating Khrushchev’s excesses of style
and extremes of policy, have chosen to reign as a committee and to govern
through compromise and consensus. They seem to recognize the complexity of
the problems facing them and generally to appreciate the limitations placed by
time and circumstance on their ability to seek new ways or to find new purposes.
It is true, in any case—in contrast to the notable series of changes which oc-
curred in the aftermath of the death of Stalin—that the main lines of Soviet
doctrine and policy have remained substantially unaltered in the roughly three
years since the fall of Khrushchev. And nowhere is this more apparent than
in the USSR’s approach to the great issues and events of world politics.

1. THE POST-KHRUSHCHEV RECORD

2. To most of the Soviet leaders, the view from Moscow could not have seemed
very good in the early fall of 1964. Khrushchev was still seeking in the main
to recover from past failures—China from 1960 onwards, Berlin in 1961, Cuba
in 1962—and he exhibited few signs of having in mind any very promising pro-
posals for the future. Many of his approaches to problems must have seemed
to his colleagues to be not only unorthodox but unrewarding. His determined
efforts to rush toward the formal excommunication of China were actually losing
ground for the USSR within the international movement. His flirtation with
West Germany in the summer of 1964 was worrying his friends at home and
alarming his allies in East Germany. And his apparently growing willingness
to abandon Vietnam to the Chinese and the Americans smacked of a retreat
which would not only violate the concept of doctrinal brotherhood but also
damage the USSR’s standing as a great power.

3. Khrushchev’s successors set about immediately after his removal to restore
convention, consistency, and momentum to Soviet foreign policy. Their first
concern was to curtail the spread of disarray within the Communist world and
to restore the good name of the USSR as the leading Communist power. To
these ends, they called off the clamorous campaign against Peking and strongly
proclaimed renewed interest in Vietnam. They surely understood that these
actions might lead to some deterioration of relations with the US, but did not
seem to believe that they would greatly increase the risks of confrontation. On
the contrary, while probably impatient with Khrushchev’s intermittent appeals
for detente with the US, the new Soviet leaders also clearly disliked his impulsive
and occasionally risky behavior and hoped that a more prudent course would
enable them to avoid international crises directly involving both the US and
the USSR. They believed that Khrushchev had been insufficiently “revolu-

sepeer 3
Page-7
SEQRET
tionary” in his handling of Communist affairs but at times overly provocative
in his dealings with the West, and they hoped somehow to redress the balance.

4. The early hopes of the new leadership for improved Soviet fortunes abroad
have scarcely been fulfilled, and the record of Soviet foreign policy since 1964
must now be viewed in Moscow with, at best, mixed feelings. In the area of
first concern, relations within the Communist world, there has been considerable
improvement in the USSR’s relative status vis-a-vis China. This has come about
partly because of Moscow’s insistence on unified Communist support of Hanoi,
a policy which has contributed to the willingness of several Asian parties to
move away from Peking. But the improvement in the Soviet position has been
the consequence mainly of China’s own conduct rather than because of any
appreciable increase in the USSR’s international standing. Sino-Soviet relations
have, in fact, continued to deteriorate and the problem remains a serious one
for the Soviet leaders. Morcover, the commitment to support North Vietnam
involved a miscalculation, i.e., the Sovict leaders’ expectation of an early Com-
munist victory in the South and their failure to foresee direct and massive US
involvement in the war. And though, as seen from Moscow, the war in Vietnam
has had its advantages, particularly in terms of what the Soviets perceive to
be the increasing isolation of the US, it has had its adverse effects as well.
Chances of future difficulties and dangers, especially vis-a-vis the US, almost cer-
tainly appear to the Soviets to be growing.’

5. Elsewhere in the Communist world, the trend toward declining Soviet
authority, already well underway in Khrushchev’s time, has not been arrested.
There have been conspicuous absences from Soviet-sponsored international Com-
munist conferences, and enthusiasm in other parties for Moscow’s handling of
its Middle Eastern policies has been noticeably subdued. Rumania’s demon-
strations of independence have continued, major examples being its diplomatic
recognition of West Germany and its deviant policy toward Israel. And the
USSR’s problems with Castro’s Cuba—particularly concerning the proper “revolu-
tionary” policy to follow in Latin America—persist and have become more open.

6. Soviet policy in the Third World can claim few particular triumphs in the
post-Khrushchev period. The campaign to normalize relations and lay the basis
for expanded influence in neighboring states has made some progress, especially
in Iran and Turkey; efforts to bolster the USSR’s international prestige were well
served by Moscow’s success in arranging a cease-fire between India and Pakistan
in 1965. But the Soviets have also suffered a number of serious setbacks in the
Third World, as in Ghana and Indonesia. Moreover, while it had once appeared
that the present Soviet leaders were approaching their Third World problems
with greater caution and selectivity than Khrushchev, their judgment was called
into question by the role they played in the Middle East crisis of 1967. Moscow
apparently could’ not resist the opportunity to manipulate Arab-Israeli tensions,

‘For a fuller discussion of Soviet policies concerning Vietnam, see SNIE 11-11-67, “Soviet
Attitudes and Intentions Toward the Vietnam War,” dated 4 May 1967, SECRET.

4 seghker
Page-8
tT
but the war which followed, and the defeat of the Arab forces in that war, were

developments which the USSR did not desire, initially did not foresee, and,
later, could not forestall.

7. It is in Western Europe that current policies have appeared most promising.
The Soviet leaders have come to appreciate the grave risks involved in Soviet
threats and demonstrations of power—as in Berlin—and to comprehend that
such tactics only serve to consolidate the Western alliance and the American
presence in Europe. Their aims have remained the same—to isolate West
Germany, disrupt NATO, and severe the close ties between Europe and the
US—but they have in recefit years generally refrained from bellicose behavior.
They have sought instead to exercise influence through more active participation
in conventional European politics and diplomacy, through the cultivation of
de Gaulle and France, and, in general, through emphasis on the desirability of
an all-European detente and security system. And largely because these tactics
have coincided with a changing climate of European opinion, there has been, in
fact, a rising interest in Western Europe in some form of settlement with the
USSR.

8. Soviet emphasis on detente in Europe has not been accompanied by any
comparable emphasis on a resolution of differences with the US. On the con-
trary, Soviet leaders have publicly asserted that no such resolution is even con-
ceivable so long as the US is involved in the war in Vietnam. But they have
also indicated (and, during the Middle East crisis, demonstrated) a strong desire
to keep the lines open to Washington. And though they have at times insisted
that US-Soviet relations must remain frozen for the duration, they have been
willing to conclude specific agreements (e.g, on the peaceful uses of outer
space) and to negotiate about others (e.g., nuclear nonproliferation) when they
saw larger advantage to Soviet policy. Thus, if Khrushchev demonstrated his
ambivalence toward the US by sometimes speaking as a friend while more often
behaving like an enemy, the present leaders have perhaps demonstrated a similar
state of mind by tending in some ways to do the opposite. In any case, it is clear
that the leadership has been unable to resolve the contradictory demands of a
policy which seeks, on the one hand, gains against the US in Europe and Southeast
Asia and elsewhere and, on the other, a tacit understanding with the US to avoid
measures and countermeasures which would seriously risk major international

crises.

ll. FOREIGN POLICY AND THE LEADERSHIP

9. It has never been possible to assess the precise impact of Soviet foreign
policy on the course of internal Soviet politics, or vice versa; the intertwining of
domestic and international policy questions with purely internal politcal concerns
is too intricate. Individual leaders seize on particular policy issues as a pretext
to embarrass or defeat political rivals, and questions of policy often become only
incidental to the struggle for power. It is also obvious that some of the top
Soviet leaders become identified with a point of view and a set of policies and that

oper 5
Page-9
sf

their political fortunes can rise or fall partly on the basis of the success or failure

of these policies. Certainly among the circumstances responsible for Khru-

shchev's downfall were the failure in 1962 of his boldest foreign initiative, the

Cuban missile venture, and the apparent failure in 1963 of his greatest domestic
. Program, the campaign to raise agricultural production.

10. The collective leadership has survived longer than many observers antici-
pated. It has done so in part, perhaps, because it works; the leadership has
for the most part been stable and its policies, though mostly undramatic, have
generally achieved some measure of success. It has also done so because
none of the leaders has as yet displayed the power, fortitude, or even the
desire to upset existing arrangements. It has almost certainly not done so,
however, because of any dearth of controversy within high councils. On the
contrary, there appear to be at least four or five major areas of debate and dis-
content within the leadership, some of which involve, either directly or in-
directly, major questions of foreign policy.

11. Economic questions, many of which have an important bearing on the
USSR’s posture abroad, have been the subject of disputes within the Soviet elite
for some time. Indeed, such questions as how much emphasis to attach to one
or another economic program, and how best to proceed with the allocation of
investment priorities, were central to much of the debate and rancor which
surrounded Khrushchev. In order to advance his favorite domestic’ programs,
especially in agriculture, Khrushchev was willing at one point to risk considerable
controversy by seeking to cut back investment in defense and, as a corollary of
this, to ease relations with the US. Khrushchev’s successors are much less will-
ing to provoke controversy, more prone to bureaucratic compromise, and less
inclined to search for quick and dramatic solutions to complex problems.
Nevertheless, they too are plagued by disagreements over how best to divide the
nation’s material resources. Thus, they have not as yet been able to agree
on the final version of the Five-Year Plan for 1966-1970, and they have continued
to dodge a number of painful decisions simply by assigning high priorities to a
broad variety of competing goals, including defense, heavy industry, agriculture,
and the consumer.?

12. Relations between the Soviet military establishment and the political
leadership appear to have been relatively harmonious in recent years, largely be-
cause the politicians have been responsive to the opinions and budgetary claims
of the military. But the scope of military authority in managing the armed forces
and the role of professional military opinion in framing policy are questions
which remain sources of potential discord. There have been occasional signs
that the resource allocation issue remains a focal point of tension. The current
question of the nature and extent of future Soviet antiballistic missile (ABM)
deployment, and whether to discuss this and other arms control issues with

*For a more extensive treatment of economic issues and of Soviet economic policies gen-
erally see NIE 11-5-67, “Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects,” dated 25 May 1967,
SECRET.

6 SHPRET
Page-10
fe

the US, scems to have led to apprehension within the military and perhaps some
dissension within the leadership as well?

13. Concerning specific questions of foreign policy, disagreement within the
leadership probably tends in the main to focus on particular issues and events
as they arise. The leadership's handling of the Middle East crisis, for example,
was severely criticized during the June meeting of the party Central Committee,
We do not know whether the critic, Nikolai Yegorychev, who subsequently was
dismissed from his important party position, had charged the senior leadership
with failing adequately to support the Arabs, or conversely, had complained that
the USSR had been overextended and overcommitted to the Arab side. Rumors
in Moscow at the time suggested the former, perhaps because Yegorychev has
long been identified with a group in the party which seems in general to have
favored a harder line both at home and abroad.

14. We believe that in Soviet politics there are, in fact, those who normally
respond to issues as traditionalists, ie., with ideological rigor and bureaucratic
conservatism, and others who are willing to stretch doctrine and entertain
certain unorthodox departures in policy. But we do not think that all Soviet
leaders can be placed in one or the other category or that such a division reflects
so simple a matter as a split between militants and moderates.

15. Discontent with Soviet actions during the Arab-Israeli war may indeed
have been strongest among the traditionalists, some of whom apparently fear
that a US-imperialist tide is sweeping over the earth and that—as in the Middle
East—Soviet policies and Soviet power have been inadequate to check or
reverse its spread. But the principal architects of Soviet policies—the dominant
senior group in the Politburo, ie. Brezhnev, Kosygin, Podgorny, and Suslov—
could by no means be lumped together simply as antitraditionalists. Though
these four men apparently were united in their determination to avoid Soviet
embroilment in the Arab-Israeli war, disagreements among them on other issues
are probably not uncommon. None of these men, however, appears to be an
extremist and they all seem to be near the middle of the Soviet political spectrum.

16. Probably in part because of this, the present Soviet leadership has so far
managed to avoid the kind of intense debate over policy issues and maneuvering
for political advantage which leads to irreconcilable factionalism and wholesale
political purge. But the recent reduction of status of Politburo member Aleksandr
Shelepin and some of his closest followers testified to the continued existence of
political tension at top levels. And if the economy should once again falter,
or if the present leadership should encounter serious reverses abroad, the
chances would increase of intensified quarrels which could bring changes at the

top.

*For a fuller account of political-military relations in the USSR, see NIE 11-4-67, “Main
Trends in Soviet Military Policy,” dated 20 July 1967, pp. 13-14, SECRET.

SEMRET 7
Page-11
SEQRET

lll, CURRENT ISSUES OF POLICY

17. Like Khrushchev and Stalin before them, the present leaders would like to
see Soviet power and ideology become dominant on a world scale. This, at any
rate, is a goal which the Soviets continue implicitly to maintain and an achieve-
ment which they no doubt continue to promise themselves. As a real prospect,
however, the notion of a worldwide Soviet triumph has long since lost much of
its substance and virtually all its immediacy. Too many things have happened
in recent years—too much trouble with the economy, too many rows with the
Chinese and within the international movement, and too few gains against the
West—to permit any responsible Soviet leader to view the future with the
kind of simplistic optimism once expressed by Khrushchev.

18. But if the Soviets now understand that there are definite limits to their
ability to shape and exploit the course of events abroad, they have not as yet
shown signs of accepting this appreciation gracefully. They sometimes seem
most reluctant to match their ambitions to their means; old habits and old
doctrines apparently die hard in the USSR, as elsewhere. Consequently, Soviet
foreign policies now seem to reflct both a new sophistication (a more realistic
and flexible awareness of national interests) and an old simplicity (the dogmatic
insistence that the world conform to the Soviet image of it). We expect, in
general, that this ambivalence will persist for some time and will continue to
be evident in the way in which the Soviet leaders grapple—or fail to grapple—
with the international issues certain to confront them.

19. Military Policy. The Soviet leaders have always conceived of military
power as an essential element of their foreign policy and, since World War
II, have viewed the balance of forces with the US as a factor of major influence
on the course of world politics. But the present leaders, while no less con-
cemed with the USSR’s military posture than their predecessors, apparently
now recognize that the impressive buildup of Soviet strategic strength will not
necessarily bring gains in foreign policy. They may already have decided that,
however essential to national security, the achievement of a rough strategic
parity with the US is unlikely in itself to bring them appreciably closer to the
fulfillment of their international objectives, and that, especially for their purposes
in the Third World, greater attention will have to be paid to the development
of ground and naval forces.‘ Soviet military Jeaders have been displaying grow-

 

‘Brig. Gen. P. D. Wynne, Jr., for the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes
this paragraph seriously underestimates the positive relationship between growing Soviet stra-
tegic capabilities and the foreign policy of the USSR, and implies a lack of Soviet appreciation
for the significance in international affairs of a markedly improved Soviet strategic posture.
He would, therefore, delete the second and third sentences and substitute the following:

“The present leaders, no less sensitive than their predecessors to the relationship
between the USSR’s military posture and their freedom of action in dealing with the
West, apparently recognize that a continuing buildup of Soviet strategic strength will
support foreign policy objectives. They may already have decided that achievement of
a credible counterforce, damage-limiting capability against the US would be worth the
effort in view of the strong backup this would provide for more aggressive pursuit of
objectives in other areas of the world utilizing specialized ground, naval, and tactical
air force elements.”

8 SEQPRET
Page-12
ing interest in broadening the range of Sovict military capabilities, and the leader-
ship as a whole evidently has become increasingly concerned with the problems
of how best to meet contingencies short of general war.

20. Arms Control. The USSR does not view arms control as a problem of

great urgency. It does see, however, some political profit in disarmament nego-
tiations and in US-Soviet agreement on certain limited forms of control, such
as a nuclear nonproliferation treaty. Concerning measures which might prove
to be politically disadvantageous, the Soviets are likely simply to stall or reject.
Thus, for example, proposals to restrain the world arms trade are not likely
to appeal to the Soviets since sich trade and aid is clearly regarded in Moscow
as the USSR’s primary political tool in the Third World. And concerning measures
of greater scope, such as the control of strategic weapons, the Soviets are likely
to proceed with great caution, suspicion, and reluctance. It is possible that they
might decide to negotiate about such matters ( including the ABM question), but
for the present we think the chances are slight that they would be willing to
agree to any comprehensive program of strategic arms control.

21. Vietnam. A prime concem of the Soviet leaders about their involvement
in the war in Vietnam is simply that they might become embroiled in situations
which they could not control. Neither the US nor North Vietnam, the principal
actors in the conflict, is very susceptible to Soviet influence; either of them could
behave independently in a way which could test the USSR’s resolve, strain its
resources, and risk its direct involvement. But, if uncomfortable about the degree
of their commitment to an ally which has a strong and difficult will of its own and
which pursues a cause (control of the South) which is not of vital concern
to the USSR, the Soviets nonetheless see no acceptable alternatives to their
present policies. Almost certainly, they hope Hanoi or Washington, or both,
will some day make a political solution to the war possible. In the meantime,
they will seek to persuade the US not to escalate the conflict any further and
to agree to terms for a settlement which would be acceptable to North Vietnam.
But they will probably not try to bring any real pressure on Hanoi to modify
its terms for such a settlement; they are not anxious to present themselves in the
role of an “appeaser”—in this way jeopardizing whatever influence they have
been able to build up—and they are certainly aware that such pressure would
probably be ineffective in present circumstances.

22. China. The USSR’s delight at the way China was able to dissipate its
resources in the Communist world by behaving bizarrely at home seems to have
been succeeded by concern over China’s rabid hostility, bewilderment over the
course of events inside China, and apprehension over what might happen next.
Over the last few years, the Soviets have strengthened their armed forces along
the Sino-Soviet frontier and in Mongolia and—though probably anticipating
only border skirmishing—are probably preparing for more serious contingencies.
But we do not know whether the Soviets have plans for direct intervention in

* See NIE 11-4-67, “Main Trends in Soviet Military Policy,” dated 20 July 1967, pp. 3, 20-21,

Ye 9

_ SECRET.
Page-13
segfter

China in the event of anarchy or civil war. We believe that the present Soviet
leaders, who have been relatively restrained in their approach to the Chinese
problem to date and who have been fairly prudent in their handling of world
affairs generally, would seek to avoid direct involvement.

23. Europe. The Soviet leaders appear to be convinced that their generally
conciliatory approach to Western Europe is a promising one and seem to recognize
that they would have much to lose and little to gain by reverting to a harsher
policy. They will probably continue for some time their present line of trying
to persuade the West Europeans that the US is beginning to disengage from
Europe and that detente with a benevolent Soviet Union is an ever growing
possibility. While a formal multilateral conference on European security is not
likely in the near future, an increase of bilateral contacts and negotiations be-
tween West European countries and the USSR seems probable. The Soviets
will almost certainly continue publicly to treat West Germany as a pariah, but
will privately seek to explore the possibility of movement in Bonn toward
acceptance of the status quo in Germany.

24, The USSR’s efforts to convince the Eastern European States to follow a
uniform Soviet-devised foreign policy have encountered resistence in recent
years, and the Soviets have had to tailor some of their own policies to meet the
needs of relations between Warsaw Pact States. Soviet tactics in negotiations
with the West on such issues as nonproliferation occasionally show evidence of
delays imposed by consultations and frictions within the Pact. At the same time,
the Soviets have scored some successes, most notably in slowing down the move-
ment in Eastern Europe toward broader and freer contacts with West Germany
and other West European States. In addition, as a result of the crisis in the
Middle East, they have been able to establish unusually close rapport with
Yugoslavia concerning policies toward the Arab World. But gains such as these
may prove to be transitory; there appears to be little that Moscow can do to
prevent the East Europeans from behaving in increasingly independent ways
when their national interests so dictate. Rumania—which has already formally
recognized West Germany and which publicly refused to align itself with the
USSR vis-a-vis the Arab-Israeli war—is by now the classic case in point.

25. The Middle East. In the wake of the Arab-Israeli conflict, Moscow ap-
pears to be taking stock of its policies in this area. The decisions taken at once
to start some replacement of military equipment were probably provisional,
intended primarily as a political holding action and not as an encouragement to
continued Arab militancy. But the Soviets must recognize that, if they wish to
enlarge their influence in the area, an aim they are very unlikely to abandon,
they have no alternative to continuing to work with the radical Arabs. Probably
as they move to repair this relationship, they will try hard to gain more direct
influence over client governments and military establishments. But it is still
unlikely that they will wish to do this by entering into actual military alliances
or acquiring military bases in Arab countries. The ambiguities in Soviet-Arab
relations will remain. Moscow will continue to exploit anti-Western attitudes in

10 suffer
Page-14
sf

Arab countries, but it will not run the military risks or accept the political costs
of identifying itself with Arab aspirations to destroy Israel. It follows also, how-
ever, that—barring a major change in Arab attitudes—the Soviets will not give
very much help to diplomatic efforts to move toward a basic settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict.°

26. The Third World. Partly as a result of their recent experiences in the
Middle East, the Soviet leaders may have undertaken a new and more searching
look at their policies in the Third World. Indeed, there may be considerable
discontent with the commitment of Soviet resources and prestige to clients whose
interest may be essentially different from those of the USSR and whose conduct
can be both unpredictable and uncontrollable. Some may argue that more cau-
tion should be exercised in involving Soviet policy with the great variety of
so-called “national liberation” forces in the Third World. The question has
probably arisen as to what degree of risk—military and political—to assume in
honoring Soviet commitments, or what Soviet clients may think are commit-
ments. But, even if such questions are under review, it seems very unlikely to
us that the Soviet leaders would as a consequence make any very dramatic
changes in policy. Any abrupt cutback in the USSR’s material support of and
political relationships with the Third World would jeopardize the heavy invest-
ment already made. Moreover, the Soviet leaders are almost certainly convinced
that, as a great power, the USSR has a legitimate interest in practically all areas
of the world and a political need to assert that interest.

*A long-range view of Soviet policies and aims is contained in NIE 11-6-67, “Soviet
Strategy and Intentions in the Mediterranean Basin,” dated 1 June 1967, SECRET. Although
completed before the June 1967 hostilities, the main judgments in this paper remain valid.
See also SNIE 11-13-67, “Probable Soviet Objectives in Rearming the Arabs,” dated 20

July 1967, SECRET.
sg u
Page-15

Page-16
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This cory
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction or a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i, Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-17
CONTR' DISSEM