
Page-1
Seren NIE 11-5-67
COHPROHED DISSE 25 May 1967

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-5-67

Soviet Economic Problems and Prospects

 

Submitted by
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf

25 May 1967
Authenticated: 7
2 ff
UTIVE SECRETARY, sip
N° 428
(SECRET
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations porticipated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Vice Adm. Rufus L. Taylor, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

Mr. Thomas 1. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State

Li. Gen. Joseph F. Carroll, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
U. Gen. Marshall 3. Carter, the Director, Notional Security Agency

Abstaining:

Mr. Howard C. Brown, Jr, the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Cont
ion end Mr. Williom C. Sullivon, the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

mi

 

 
    
  
    
    

WARNING

E National Defense of the United States
18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
unauthorized person is prohibited

This material contains information affecti
within the meaning of the espionage,

mission or revelation of which jgeGhy manner to
Page-3
the Central Intelligence Agency.

 

 

 

| a i.
th of fa
vate “4/1,
Gye

| me TY 3

|

| * CONTENTS

| Page

: SUMMARY ee : eee estes. - 1

| DISCUSSION ..... . eran eettetedheeenes vee 8

| I. GENERAL PERFORMANCE Peet ee te deesl ssh astaetae 3

|

|

| Il. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS Soper cece S
Economic Reform 5
Industry 6
Agriculture eet 7
Defense and Space Spending 7
Living Standards a soe. 8
Plans and Prospects a . 10

Ill. FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS reas : .. 12
Trade with the Industrial West ......0.........6600000 00 cece eee 12
Economic Relations with Eastern Europe eels cee, 1B
Aid and Trade with the Third World “i _ 14
IV. POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS sPeceefecereboseh : vee 16
Page-4
he

SOVIET ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
AND PROSPECTS

SUMMARY

A. After some years of slowdown in its rate of growth, the Soviet
economy had a good year in 1966. Gross national product (GNP)
grew an impressive 8 percent. Though much of this gain was due
to favorable weather and a record harvest, the leadership can take
credit for some of the improvement. But last year’s performance
is not necessarily a harbinger of a durable upward trend. Many
serious problems remain in an economy which uses resources ineffi-
ciently and is still backward in many sectors.

B. The leadership has been trying to effect a return to the high
rates of growth which prevailed in the 1950's by a reform of adminis-
trative structures, planning procedures, and incentive programs. The
authority of enterprise managers has been strengthened, and interest
charges on the use of capital and new success indicators (including
sales and profitability) have been introduced. While such measures
represent improvements, the reform program as a whole is an essen-
tially timid response to a large problem; the leadership is clearly con-
cerned that a more thoroughgoing reform might jeopardize its political
controls.

C. The share of GNP devoted to defense and space spending has
declined in recent years, but the burden on the economy has not.
The resource demands arising from research and development and
the production of advanced weapons systems have used high quality
manpower and top-grade materials faster than the growth of the
economy can comfortably support. We foresee no real easing of
these strains. Moreover, total military and space spending will prob-
ably increase through at least 1970 at about the same rate as the
rise in total output.

seer
Page-5
D. Partly as a consequence, living standards are likely to rise
only very gradually. Much of the planned growth in per capita real
income is dependent on boosts in productivity which may not ma-
terialize. Further, as in the past, consumer programs are likely to
be among the first to suffer if plans go awry in higher priority sectors.

E. The goals of the current Five-Year Plan (1966-1970) will re-
quire average annual growth rates comparable to those of the 1950’s—-
8 to 8.5 percent in industrial production, and nearly. 5 percent in
agricultural output. We estimate that industrial output will be some-
what short of its target, and that the annual growth of agricultural
output will fall somewhere between 3 and 5 percent (assuming normal .
weather). Overall growth (GNP) may achieve an annual rate rang-
ing from 4 to 6 percent.

F. The Soviets view trade with the industrial West as an especially
valuable means to help overcome backwardness in certain sectors of
the economy. They are likely to continue their drive for an expan-
sion of this trade, which has more than doubled over the past 10
years. Trade with the West will almost certainly not climb at the
very rapid pace characteristic of the early 1960's, though it will prob-
ably increase at about 6 percent per annum.

G. It seems doubtful that economic issues will soon produce
another major unsettling of the political scence. The current leader-
ship appears to recognize that the USSR’s economic problems are
tremendously complex and not susceptible to quick and easy solu-
tions. Should the round of reform and adjustment which has been
going on for the last two years or so ultimately fail, however, a re-
newal of leadership struggle over economic policy is entirely possible.

H. The condition of the economy does not at present carry any
very marked implications for Soviet foreign policy; ample resources
will continue to be available for support of a large arms effort, foreign
aid, and other instruments of external policy. The Soviet leaders
appear, however, to be preoccupied with their economic problems
and in a general sense wish to avoid involvements abroad which would
bring new economic burdens.

2 sofer
Page-6
segfer

DISCUSSION

1. After some years of slowdown in its rate of growth, the Soviet economy
had a good year in 1966. For several years the Soviet leaders have been
struggling, sometimes with each other, to devise ways of overcoming the slow-
down, since their plans both at home and abroad depend on a continuing high
rate of advance. In part, their problems are those of success. The economy
has grown so large and complex that the traditional command methods of
planning and direction are no-longer adequate. The improved performance of
1966 probably owes something to measures the leadership has taken, but it
owes more to record crops brought by unusually favorable weather. The ques-
tion for the future is whether the leadership will be able to devise policies
which would return the economy to a high rate of advance on a sustained basis.

I. GENERAL PERFORMANCE *

2. During the first 5 years of this decade, the average annual growth rate
of the Soviet economy fell to about 4.5 percent, down from about 6.5 percent
in the last half of the 1950's. This significant decline can be attributed pri-
marily to the sharp drop in the rate of growth of productivity. In the 1950’s,
the growth in the productivity of labor and capital (plant and equipment)
averaged more than 2.5 percent each year, and this alone accounted for about
two-fifths of the growth in total output. In the first half of the 1960's, however,
gains in total output were attributable almost entirely to the growth of labor
and capital inputs, ie, of actual manhours, plant, and equipment. (See
Figure 1.)

3. The precipitous decline in growth of productivity was the consequence
of several important developments: (2) a marked slowdown in the pace at
which new and more modern plant and equipment was introduced; (b) con-
tinuing delays and difficulties in the utilization of new equipment—faulty design
and assembly work, shortages of educated and trained operating personnel,
organizational shortcomings; (c) the continuing drain of highly skilled men
and top grade materials by the defense effort; (d) the increased costs of tech-
nological modernization and innovation as the economy advanced; and (e)

* Although we accept most of the Soviets’ official commodity statistics, we do not accept
their aggregate measures of growth (e.g., for national income and industrial output), or their
Statistics on agricultural output, which we believe are substantially overstated. The aggregates
and the agricultural figures used in this estimate were calculated by CIA and accepted by
the intelligence community.

Rates of growth and other statistical comparisons in the estimate have been carried out
numerically to the degree required to make valid comparisons. The presentation of the
data to the first decimal point, however, does not necessarily reflect a comparable degree of
accuracy in either the absolute level of a given value or in the absolute difference between
two values.

The base year used in deriving average annual rates of growth is the year preceding the

given year or period.
segfex 3
Page-7
ed / Figure
USSR: Average Annual Rates of Growth of GNP, Inputs of Capital
and Labor, and Productivity of Capital and Labor, 1951-65

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      

. Pr it
> ge: lGNP erceri
6.4
6 ’
5 Inputs, of Capital
a ond: Labor Combined .
4.0 Productivity of Capital
4 ‘and Labor Combined
3
2 , :
1 |
ee) [ese AS :

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 3 4 ee
1951-55 1956-60 1961-65 1951-55 1956-60 1961-65 1951-55 1956-60 ~1961-65

ws she
86840 5.67 CIAL oan
Page-8
the growing confusion, inefficiency, and unwieldiness of industrial and agri-
cultural administrative systems, combined with continued shortcomings in
incentive systems and in the methods of evaluating economic progress.

4. Preliminary calculations indicate that the growth of productivity increased
sharply in 1966, exceeding somewhat the high rate characteristic of the 1950's
and markedly advancing over that of the first half of this decade. This was
reflected in an impressive gain of almost 8 percent in industrial production
and a record output in agriculture. The result was a rise in CNP of nearly
8 percent compared to less than 5.5 percent in 1965 (and an estimated 5.5
percent in the US in 1966). Much of this gain was undoubtedly due simply
to fortunate cireumstances—good weather and an unusually good harvest. It
does not necessarily follow that the 1966 performance is a harbinger of a durable
upward trend in the economy; many serious problems remain,

ll. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS

Economic Reform

5. Serious dissatisfaction with the performance of the Soviet economic system
led in 1965 to an announcement by Premier Kosygin of a comprehensive pro-
gram of reform. Over a period of several years, the administrative structure
of the economy is to be revamped at both the national and: enterprise levels,
the system of planning is to be modernized, and the methods of gauging success
and providing incentives are to be recast.

6. Within this broad framework of reform, several specific measures are being
put into effect: (a) the old Khrushchevian system of management through
regional economic councils (sovnarkhozy) has been abolished and replaced
by a central structure consisting of 23 industrial ministries and a powerful
planning commission (Gosplan); (b) the authority of enterprise managers
over the use of their labor and working capital has been strengthened, and
some can now develop limited contractual relationships with customers; (c) the
number of centrally determined plan assignments and the detailed specifications
accompanying them have been substantially reduced; (d) the old success in-
dicators, gross value of output and unit costs—which encouraged managers to
stress sheer quantity at the expense of quality and assortment—have been super-
seded by more meaningful indicators, including sales and profitability (return
on fixed plus working capital); (e) a new interest charge of 3 to 6 percent
on the use of capital has been introduced; and (£) prices, particularly industrial
wholesale prices, are being subjected to review and are scheduled to be brought
into line with average costs of production, which, for the first time, are to reflect
charges for the use of capital.

7. The Soviet press has devoted considerable attention to the progress of
the economic reform, reporting both the successes and problems of implementa-
tion. Enterprises which now function under the new system (some 2,500, ac-
counting for about 20 percent of total industrial output) are said to have scored
gains in sales, profits, and labor productivity considerably greater than those

segftr 5
Page-9
segeer

for industry as a whole. (Most of these enterprises, however, performed better
than industry as a whole even before their transfer.) On the other hand, prob-
lems publicly discussed have included bureaucratic footdragging and meddling,
the inefficiency of the banking system, the nonfulfillment of contracts by suppliers
and customers, and inability to spend accumulated funds for capital improvements
because of a lack of plans and shortages of manpower and materials. On the
whole, the Soviet leaders have appeared to be satisfied with the initial results of
the reform, though they remain committed to a cautious and piecemeal introduc-

tion of many of its features.

8. The economic reform contains some measures which may represent mean-
ingful improvements over past practices, and clearly some progress is being
made in its implementation. But the new program is less liberal and less
ambitious than some now underway in Eastern Europe and is, in fact, an essen-
tially timid response to a large problem. The Soviet leaders are clearly con-
cerned about economic dislocations resulting from reform and, more important,
the possible loss of political controls. Although a faint but audible theme
of the reform is market socialism—interest, profits, a touch of the market mech-
anism—the new system remains tightly circumscribed by the old. Indeed, the
principal attributes of a command economy—central direction and planning of
production and centrally determined price structures—remain, and are intended
to remain, fundamentally unaltered.

9. In the long run, as the current reform proves to be inadequate, as gains
in efficiency turn out to be marginal or temporary, dissatisfaction (already voiced
by some academic economists) will increase. A new round of reform proposals
would then probably become the subject of controversy within the leadership.

Industry

10. The 6.4 percent average annual rate of growth of industrial output during
the first half of this decade was considerably lower than the rate maintained in
the 1950's (about 9.3 percent). A pronounced decline in the growth of pro-
ductivity in industry seems to have been primarily responsible. But Soviet
industrial production rose by an estimated 7.8 percent last year. Productivity
was up, perhaps largely as the result of the assimilation of new capacity at a
faster pace and more efficient manner than has generally been the case in the past.

1. The current Five-Year Plan (1966-1970) calls for about a 50 percent rise
in both industrial output and investment. The investment target for industry
is about an 8 percent rise per year, and the planned annual increase in employ-
ment is less than 2 percent. Priorities are assigned to the development of the
chemical, “metallurgical, machinery, oil and gas, and electric power industries.
The output of many consumer durables is to be boosted substantially; the pro-
duction of automobiles, for example, is to be nearly quadrupled—from 201,000
in 1965 to 750,000 in 1970. We believe that industrial productivity and output
will grow at faster rates than in the first half of the 1960's, but will fall somewhat
short of plan goals.

 

6

fe
Page-10
seghr
Agriculture

12. Agricultural production in the USSR in the years 1956-1960 averaged some
36 percent above the level of 1951-1955. But during the first half of this decade,
a period in which both incomes and expectations grew appreciably, the average
annual output was only about 11 percent above that of the preceding five-year
period and, on a per capita basis, was only about 2.5 percent higher. In 1963-
1965, the average annual net imports of grain equalled 11 percent of domestic
output, as against net exports of an average 7 percent in 1960-1962. Increases
in crop and livestock production in 1966 have, of course, at least temporar‘ly
reversed the trend toward agricultural stagnation. Overall net output grew by
an estimated 10 percent and both the grain harvest and the output of meat
and milk reached record highs. (Grain production totaled an estimated 135-140
million metric tons, up from 100 million in 1965 and 120 million in 1964.)

13. The current Five-Year Plan calls for agriculture to receive twice the invest-
ment it did in 1961-1965 and a growing share of total investment: 25 percent in
1970 vs. 18 percent in 1965 (compared to 6 percent in the US in 1966). De-
liveries of farm machinery are scheduled to increase at a faster rate, fertilizer
output is to double, the area of reclaimed land is to expand by a third, and
farmers are to be provided with additional financial incentives. This massive
program is somewhat behind schedule; both investment growth and the output
of farm machinery are running behind rates necessary to meet the 1970 goals.
Nevertheless, considerable progress has been made in most areas of the program;
good weather in 1966 was no doubt primarily responsible for the bumper crops,
but the greater availability of fertilizers and the introduction of a variety of
incentives for the farmer probably contributed in an important way to the rise
in output. Assuming normal weather and no slackening in the determination of
the regime, we estimate that agricultural production will increase 3 to 5 percent
annually during the period 1966-1970; close to a 5 percent average annual in-
crease is required to meet plan targets.

Defense and Space Spending

14. Following several years of relatively modest increases, total Soviet mili-
tary and space expenditures rose sharply in 1966 and will probably show a
further increase to more than 20 billion rubles in 1967, some 16 percent higher
than the figure in 1965. Though the share of GNP devoted to defense and
space spending has actually declined in recent years—from about 16 percent
in 1950 to less than 10 percent—the burden on the economy has not really
been eased. There has been a significant shift in the composition of mili-
tary expenditures, away from emphasis on the relatively simple wants of the
general purpose forces and toward the complex requirements of research and
development (R&D) and the strategic forces. Thus expenditures for military
R&D and space rose from only 4 percent of total military and space spending
in 1950 to about 27 percent in 1966, and the share devoted to strategic offense
and strategic defense increased from about 6 percent each to some 13 percent
each during the same period. The volume of resources devoted to general

segfix 7
Page-11
segler

purpose forces has remained roughly constant for the past six years, although
the share of total expenditures given to these forces has declined from about
35 percent in 1961 to an estimated 28 percent in 1967. (See Figure 2.)

15. The military has been preempting high quality manpower and top-grade
machinery and materials at a faster rate than the general growth of the
economy can comfortably support. ‘The resources needed by advanced mili-
tary and space programs are also those most wanted by the civilian economy.
Soviet industry and agriculture, for example, are in urgent need of R&D pro-
grams, but military and space requirements draw off the best scientific man-
power and the bulk of the funds allocated for such purposes. Similarly, civilian
industry is in great need of modern, technologically advanced production equip-
ment, but the machine building industry, which is responsible for satisfying such
needs, also bears the brunt of the production of advanced weapons systems.
The sagging rates of growth of output, investment, and productivity in industry
as a whole—only partly restored in 1966—can in part be attributed to the
impact of military and space priorities.

16. Military expenditures through 1968 and 1969 are already fairly well deter-
mined by programs in progress. Expenditures will continue to reflect the rapid
pace and large number of advanced programs being pursued simultaneously and
the maintenance of a strong R&D effort. Trends after 1969 will reflect in part
decisions uot yet made. These will reflect the Soviets’ appraisal of US policies,
their view of the international climate as a whole, and in particular any
US military involvements at that time; and to some extent, their evaluation of
the impact of military spending on the remainder of the economy. Our best
judgment at this time is that Soviet military and space spending (19 billion
rubles in 1966) will grow to some 23 billion rubles in 1970. In general, these
increases in military expenditures will be more or less in line with the rise
in total Soviet output, but will continue to take resources badly needed in
other sectors of the economy.

Living Standards

17. The standard of living of the Soviet people as a whole has been growing
at a slow pace since 1960. (See Figure 3.) Per capita consumption of goods
and services nearly doubled between 1950 and 1966 but almost two-thirds of
that increase occurred before 1958. Consumer-oriented investment (ie., invest-
ment in agriculture, housing, consumer goods industries, and services) grew
only some 5.5 percent annually in the years 1961-1965; it grew about 6.5 percent
in 1966. Gains were registered in 1966, especially in the consumption of both
soft and durable goods, but the completion of new housing was up by only
1 percent (compared to a plan goal of 12.5 percent). A development in
income distribution which may have important long-term social and economic
effects is the marked improvement which is occurring in earnings of the rural
population. The regime believes that removal of the vast disparity in living
standards between city and country will help to promote productivity in agri-
culture, on which so much in current economic plans depends.

8 suffer
Page-12

Page-13
sof

18, Living standards. are likely to improve only gradually over the next several
years. The leaders have promised the consumer a better deal, and have made
some moves in this direction, but they have also bluntly stated that gains in
consumer welfare scheduled in the Five-Year Plan are contingent on a resumption
of high growth rates in productivity. Much of the planned, fairly substantial
growth in per capita real income is scheduled to come from increases in bonus
payments and is thus also dependent on boosts in productivity. Moreover, as
in the past, consumer programs are likely to be among the first to suffer from
short-falls elsewhere in the economy.

Plans and Prospects

19. The draft directives of the Five-Year Plan for 1966-1970 show that the
present leaders have set their sights on regaining the economic momentum of
the 1950’s, The current Five-Year Plan has not been formally approved and
may yet be extensively revised, but, as initially outlined, calls for or implies
average annual growth rates comparable to those of the 1950’s—6 percent in
GNP, 8 to 85 percent in industrial production, and nearly 5 percent in agri-
cultural output. These goals, while scaling down those for 1970 first. put
forward by Khrushchev in 1961, are nonetheless ambitious and—since the
planned rates of increase in investment and in employment are relatively modest—
will require a rapid resurgence in the growth of productivity; they jumped from
the average annual rate of some 0.5 percent in the first half of the 1960's to
nearly 2 percent in the last half.

20. In general, the outlook for the progress of the Soviet economy as a whole
will depend on how successful the Soviets are in modernizing both their means
(their work force, their plant and equipment, and the efficiency of their invest-
ment) and their methods (their allocation of priorities, structuring of manage-
ment, and provision of incentives). As indicated, there are as yet few signs
that the Soviet economic system is about to be transformed into an efficient,
exible, and responsive instrument. Moreover, some of the elements responsible
for the rapid growth rate in the 1950's can no longer provide as much stimulus

to growth at the present stage of the economy's development.

21. In those areas, generally the basic industries, where Soviet technology
has been approaching the more advanced standards—and these areas account
for much of manufactured output—it is no longer possible (as it was in the
1950's) to greatly increase output simply through the introduction of Western
technology. Moreover, it is no longer possible to effect rapid improvement
in the average age of capital stock and in the skills of the working force.
Finally, in the years ahead, the USSR will find it difficult to maintain the rate
of growth of total inputs to the economy (about 5 percent) since 1962, The
pattem of growth of these inputs suggests, in fact, a rise on the order of 4
percent per year through 1970. Productivity, on the other hand, should improve
over the early 1960's rate; a range of from more than 0.5 percent to 1.5 percent
annually appears reasonable, Together, this productivity rate and the postu-

10 siffer
Page-14

Page-15
sifer

lated growth of inputs would permit an average yearly rise in GNP of from
4 to 6 percent.

Ill. FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS
Trade with the Industrial West

22. One partial answer the Soviet leaders have seen to the economic prob-
lems with which they have been coping in recent years lies in the development
of their external trade, especially with the industrial West. The economic and
technological backwardness of certaif sectors of the economy results in part
from its relative isolation from the more dynamic Western economies. The
push the Soviets have tried to give to their trade with Western Europe in recent
years, as well as to scientific and technical exchanges of all sorts, reflects recogni-
tion of this fact. This emphasis seems likely to continue as pressures mount for
modernizing the unevenly developed Soviet economy.

23, Trade between the industrial West and the Soviet Union has more than
doubled over the past 10 years. This development reflects not only a Soviet
interest but also more generous credit terms provided by West European states
as their interest in this market grew, partly for political reasons. In 1966,
this trade amounted to about $3.5 billion, about 20 percent of the $16.8 billion
total of Soviet foreign trade turnover. The USSR’s hard currency deficit, some
$600 million in 1964, declined to about $100 million in 1966. Sales of gold to
offset these deficits dropped by comparable amounts, from $520 million in 1964
to $35 million in 1966. With the improvement in the USSR’s balance of pay-
ments position, orders for Western machinery were greatly increased in 1966;
these orders, which had fallen off sharply in 1964 and 1965, reached a record
high of about $800 million, nearly half of which was involved in the purchase
of an automobile plant from Italy’s Fiat. Payments on most of these orders
will not begin for a number of years.

24. The US’s share of Soviet trade with the industrial West is small; it
amounted to some $90 million in 1966, 0.5 percent of total Soviet foreign
trade turnover and 0.2 percent of US trade. The USSR would probably like to
see trade with the US increase, particularly if there were some relaxation in
US embargoes on such strategically useful items as computers, advanced ma-
chine tools, and microelectronics. But most Soviet raw materials exports are
not very attractive to US importers. Moreover, much of the machinery and
equipment the Soviets are interested in is normally available from Western
Europe and Japan at lower costs and more favorable terms than from the US.
There thus seems to be little likelihood of any significant increase in US-
Soviet trade.

25. Lack of suitable export goods will also continue to limit the growth of
Soviet trade elsewhere within the industrial West. The West European market
for Soviet coal, oil, cotton, and timber products is limited, as are world markets
for Soviet ores and metals. Soviet manufactured goods—often badly made and
poorly packaged—cannot compete with domestic manufacturers in Western

12 seer
Page-16
wcher

Europe. Even Soviet agricultural products—should a succession of good crop
years make the USSR a net exporter of food—would encounter protectionist
barriers in Western Europe. Accordingly, Soviet trade with the industrial West
will almost certainly not climb at the very rapid pace characteristic of the early
1960's, though it will probably increase at about 6 percent per annum. Given
their present trade policies, and assuming no new reverses in grain production,
the Soviets should be able to keep their hard currency deficit within manage-
able proportions over the next few years. In this case, their gold reserves—
which sank to an estimated $1.1 billion in 1965—would gradually rise.

Economic Relations with Eastern Europe

26. Although the absolute value of East European trade with the industrial
West has increased greatly over the past 10 years (from $1.9 billion in 1955
to $4.8 billion in 1965), it has not done so at the expense of the Soviet Union,
whose share of East European foreign trade has remained relatively stable.
In 1966 Soviet trade with Eastern Europe amounted to $9.2 billion, about 55
percent of total Soviet foreign trade turnover. Moscow's attitude toward the
expansion of Eastern European trade with the West has been equivocal; the
Soviet leadership has seen benefits in expanded trade and has done little to
discourage it. But the dangers of political entanglement and economic imbal-
ance within CEMA have also been apparent to Soviet leaders, and they have
cautioned their allies not to go too far too fast.

27. Under Brezhnev and Kosygin, the Soviet Government has itself stimulated
Eastern European interest in trade with the West by harder bargaining with
its Eastem European partners. Moscow has come to realize that the rising
cost of extracting and transporting many of the raw materials it has traditionally
exchanged for East European manufactured goods has outstripped the cost
of producing such goods in the Soviet Union. One consequence of this realiza-
tion has been Soviet insistence on new pricing standards in Soviet-East European
commodity trade, substituting prices based on high Soviet production and trans-
portation costs for the system of world market prices used earlier. They have
also sought Eastern European investment funds for the expansion of Soviet
raw materials industries. The net effect of this new approach, if it comes into
force, will probably be to make trade with non-Bloc partners still more attrac-
tive to the East Europeans than it now is, particularly in the areas of com-
modities and raw materials imports.

28, Nevertheless, in thus pursuing its own interests, the USSR runs no serious
risk of losing its predominant economic position in Eastern Europe. The price
concessions demanded by the Soviet Government are chiefly at the expense of
Czechoslovakia and East Germany. Three-quarters of Soviet net exports of
raw materials and semimanufactures to Eastem Europe go to these two countries.
They are so dependent economically on the USSR that they have only limited
leverage in resisting Soviet terms. The other four countries are not greatly
affected by the new Soviet price demands; Bulgaria and Rumania, in fact, sup-
port them because their own trade would benefit. Moreover, the USSR has

segffx 13
Page-17
segher

treated Bulgaria, Hungary, and Poland quite generously in the current trade
agreement, in part surely to discourage them from following in the footsteps
of Rumania.

29. The Soviet leadership appears to recognize that the trend toward looser
economic and political ties within the Soviet Bloc will not be reversed. It hopes,
however, to be able to slow the process and to set limits to it. The Soviets
also recognize that an extensive development of Eastern Europe’s relations with
the West might stimulate more independence in the policies of these states than
Moscow wants to see. They are already concerned, for example, by Rumania’s
growing trade and political ties in Western Europe, and the assertiveness toward
Moscow which has accompanied them. On balance, however, we do not think
the Soviets will find some further growth of Eastern Europe's trade with the
West fundamentally incompatible with their own long-term interests, though
they will remain concerned to preserve their own political and economic domi-
nance in the area.

Aid and Trade with the Third World

30. Since 1954, the USSR has extended about $6 billion in economic aid to
some 35 countries of the underdeveloped world. In the same period, Soviet
military aid extensions have totaled an additional $4.3 billion. (See Figure 4.)
While most of the military aid extensions have been drawn (about $3.5 billion),
only about one-third of economic aid extensions had been drawn by the close
of 1966 ($2.2 billion), and the net costs to the USSR are being steadily reduced
by debtor repayments (about $500 million has been scheduled for repayment
so far), Much of this cost, however, may never be repaid—for example, by
Indonesia, the UAR, and Ghana.

31. Brezhnev and Kosygin have maintained the essential features of the
foreign economic assistance program pursued under Khrushchev. Extensions of
new aid reached their highest annual total (more than $1 billion) in 1964 under
Khrushchev, but did not decline substantially in 1965 and 1966 when a two-year
total of some $1.7 Dillion was committed. The new leaders did, however,
make some changes in their approach to the program. Specifically, they began
to handle foreign assistance in a more deliberate fashion, abandoning the practice
of extending large umbrella type credits before specific projects were negotiated.
They also began to take advantage of a more receptive attitude toward Soviet
aid in certain countries peripheral to the USSR (Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan),
without, however, neglecting interests in such other favored recipients as the
UAR and India.

32. In point of fact, the Soviet aid program represents no significant burden on
the Soviet economy. From time to time, specific industries (e.g. the heavy
construction equipment industry) in the USSR may feel the pressure of foreign
aid deliveries, but at no time have the costs of these deliveries amounted to
more than 0.1 percent of the Soviet GNP, and a more typical annual figure
would halve that, Extensions of aid in the next few years will probably

14 segftr
Page-18
~ Extensions
Drawings

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

15

 

BEST COPY
AVAILABLE
Page-19
sober

follow past patterns, Huctuating from year to year with political circumstances
and the demands of certain recipients. Drawings on aid are likely to rise from
the $350 million average of recent years to about $400-§450 million in 1970;
the schedule of repayments rises from about $115 million in 1965 and $150
million in 1966 and is expected to almost double in the next 5 years. At the
same time, the Soviet aid program has stimulated Soviet trade with aid
recipients. This now accounts for nearly 11 percent of all Soviet foreign trade,
and it will probably continue to increase at a rate of about 10 percent a year
over the next few years.

IV. POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS

33. All Soviet leaders are inclined to look on the USSR’s economy in terms
of its political assets and liabilities, its strengths and weaknesses as the ultimate
source of the state’s power, and its capacity to sustain high national purpose
and ambition, But such questions as how best to insure the economy's vigor,
how much emphasis to attach to one or another economic program, and how
to proceed with the allocation of investment priorities have long been abrasive
issues in leadership politics. Khrushchev often faced opposition born in part
of conflicting attitudes toward precisely these questions. His economic pro-
grams were opposed by a variety of vested interests in the military and heavy
industry bureaucracy and among economic managers and party, ideologues,
not to mention among his own immediate colleagues. This opposition figured
strongly in the coup that brought his downfall.

34. After Khrushchev’s fall in 1964 there appeared to be a consensus within
the top leadership on economic policy, at least on the point that no quick and
dramatic solutions to the problems that had arisen were possible. This has
apparently reduced controversy and indicates a tendency to make bureaucratic
compromises which sidestep contentious decisions. Thus the leaders appear will-
ing to try to appease the appetites of the military and the steelmakers, but
so far they have been unable to agree even on the final version of the Five-
Year Plan, and have dodged a number of painful decisions simply by assigning
high priorities to a broad variety of competing tasks—strengthening national
defense, developing heavy industry, raising agricultural production, modernizing
industry, and improving the lot of the consumer.

35. Individual members of the leadership, either because of particular eco-
nomic interests or because of special political considerations, or both, have be-
come identified with particular attitudes and programs. Brezhnev, for example,
has associated himself most closely with agriculture, defense, and heavy industry.
Kosygin, on the other hand, is certainly the most ardent exponent of the need
for industrial reform, for which some party and central government bureau-
crats have shown little enthusiasm. Politburo member and First Deputy Premier
Polyansky, a consistent champion of agriculture, has recently hinted at a major
area of contention by assailing as “extremely dangerous” the notions of “some
comrades” who believe that last year’s successes in agriculture now permit a
diversion of resources to other areas of the economy.

16 oF
Page-20
she

36. While economic issues will continue to occupy a central place in the
preoccupations and debates of the leadership, it seems doubtful that they will
soon produce another major unsettling of the political scene. There are several
factors which may be working to limit the political impact of economic contro-
versy. The economy has recovered from the near-crisis of 1963, and its prob-
lems, though still serious, are no longer so acute. Moreover, the leadership
appears to have learned from its experiences with Khrushchev that many of
the USSR’s economic problems are tremendously complex, that official doctrines
may obstruct the search for solutions, and that impulse and demagoguery are
likely to create additional difficulties. Finally, the increased involvement of
institutional elements in the decision-making process, ie., the growing role of
nonparty vested interests, may have the effect of broadening the nature of
high-level . discussion, widening the circle of those influencing policy, and
removing from the debates some of the elements of purely party infighting.

37. Nevertheless, should the round of reform and adjustment which has
been going on over the last two years or so fail ultimately to achieve the
results hoped for, a renewal of leadership struggle over economic policy is
entirely possible. The ambitious aims which Soviet policy pursues externally
and the extensive array of unmet needs in the internal society will impose
severe strains on available resources for a good many years to come. If eco-
nomic problems should take on a crisis character again, more radical solutions,
carrying implications of change for political institutions as well, might have to
be entertained. In such circumstances, the struggles within the party and the
competition of power at the top, always present in the Soviet system, could
become much more acute than they have been in recent years.

38. The condition of the economy does not at present carry any very marked
implications for Soviet external policy. The Soviet leaders appear to be pre-
occupied with their economic problems, however, and in a general sense they
apparently wish to avoid involvements abroad which would bring new eco-
nomic burdens. Nevertheless, the economy probably does not impose con-
straints on foreign policy in the sense that the Soviets are foregoing particular
initiatives in that field primarily for economic reasons. Ample resources will
continue to be available for support of a large arms effort, foreign military and
economic aid, and other instruments of foreign policy.
Page-21
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-te-knew basis. Additional esseatial dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

 
   

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the crgonization of the Joirt Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

|. Assistant Chief cf Naval Operations {Intelligence}, for the Department of the
Novy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

f. Director of intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureay of Investigation

h.

i.

Director of NSA, for the Nationol Security Agency
Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Ayency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one yeor. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/'2, 22 June 1953,

4, The title of this decument when used separately from the text should be clas-
sified: CORO HGS nate

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-22
