
Page-1
Director of
Central
Intelligence

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

DATE: MAY 2001
(bit)

(b)(3)
(s}

Onsen
cco

 

Sieraa Nanna teen crear Strertes
Page-2
THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the
Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security
Agency, and the intelligence organization of the Department of State.

Also Participating:
The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
The Director of Naval Intelligence, Department of the Navy
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps

Warning Notice
Intelligence Sources or Methods Involved
(WNINTEL)

NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION
Unauthorized Disclosure Subject to Criminal Sanctions

DISSEMINATION CONTROL ABBREVIATIONS

NOFORN- Not Releasable to Foreign Nationals

NOCONTRACT-— Not Releasable to Contractors or
Contractor /Consultants

PROPIN— Caution—Proprietary Information Involved

ORCON- Dissemination and Extraction of Information
Controlled by Originator

REL...— This Information Has Been Authorized for

Release to...
Page-3
SEC,
NOFORN/! RACT/ORCON

SNIE 70/ 1-87

Sub-Saharan Africa:
Implications of the AIDS

Pandemic YS

Information available as of 27 May 1987 was used in the
preparation of this Estimate, which was approved by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board on 2 June 1987.

of
Page-4
Ss
NOFORN, ONTRACT/ORCON

 

CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE .. 1
KEY JUDGMENTS oo... escccccsccsssessssssessseesiessssecsssessseessseesssseesasvessrvenes 3
DISCUSSION 7

Introduction ..
Factors Contributing to the Rapid Spread of AIDS
Sexual Mores and Cultural Factors ......cccccsssscssssssessssssecesssseesssssees 7
Inadequate Health Systems ......... 10

Effect of Other Endemic Diseases 10
A Second Virus ....esccccssescsssessseesseeseneee 10

  

 

 

 
 

 

 

Prospects for Epidemic Spread .........sssssssssssessssssecsssssssesssssveesssseseseeese 12
Complicating Factors .....cccccsccssssessssesssssesssuessssessseessreesssecesssessareersase 13
Implications 13
Africa .. 13

 
 

The Soviet Bloc
The West ........:0
The United States

14
14
15

ANNEX: AIDS Disinformation Campaign... 17
Page-5
SE
NOFORN/| INTRACT/ORCON

PREFACE

The initially sporadic and anecdotal reporting of the AIDS pan-
demic in Africa—an important aspect of the increasing global AIDS
problem—presented an alarming picture of a deadly disease spreading
rapidly throughout the region. The volume of reporting increased
immensely in 1987, driven by growing concern over the spread of the
disease in the West as well as in Africa, and to a modest degree by task-
ing for this paper. Most, of the reports remain anecdotal or based on
small medical research programs lacking a strong epidemiological basis.
We nonetheless feel confident in the conclusions that follow. Despite
the lack of widespread scientific research, the reporting confirms that
this deadly epidemic is spreading out of control in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Rather than await more information, we feel sufficient material is
available to serve as a basis for broad conclusions in examining the
serious implications of the AIDS pandemic for African, Soviet Bloc,
Western, and US interests. This paper projects through the next five
years, although some tentative judgments extend further. A crucial
assumption made here is that no vaccine or cure will be developed and
distributed to Africa during this period. Medical opinion is that the
virus will not mutate to a benign form. ia
Page-6
SEs
NOFORN, INTRACT/ORCON

KEY JUDGMENTS

During the 1980s Africa endured and continues to experience wars,
insurgencies, drought, desertification, insect plagues, famines, under-
nourishment, diseases, dysfunctional economic policies—and now the
AIDS pandemic. The combination of these adversities with AIDS will
devastate generations of Africans. Over the next several years, millions
will succumb to infection and disease, and the physical and intellectual
development of the next generation will be severely stunted. An
estimated 50,000 Africans already have died from AIDS. Of the 2 to 5
million Africans currently infected with the virus, a minimum of
400,000 to a high of 1.5 million could develop the clinical symptoms of
AIDS by 1992, with death to follow soon after. Because a medical
breakthrough in prevention, suppression, or cure, or a benign mutation
of the disease are unlikely, annual African deaths from AIDS after 1992
are likely to continue to climb into the millions.

We believe that several identifiable factors contribute to the
ongoing, rapid spread of AIDS across Sub-Saharan Africa:

— Heterosexual transmission is the major mode of spreading the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in Africa.

— Health systems are, and will continue to be, grossly inadequate.
The use of unsterile needles at health centers—a widespread
practice—and countries’ inability to guarantee safe blood trans-
fusions will facilitate transmission of the virus.

— Because the fundamental AIDS problem is the immune defi-
ciency caused by HIV, infection by the virus leads to a
worsening of endemic diseases.

— The recent medical confirmation that there is a second AIDS
virus, HIV-2, vastly complicates the hunt for a vaccine and will
require new blood-screening tests. The second virus was con-
firmed in AIDS patients in West Africa, an area thought to be
relatively untouched by AIDS until now, raising the possibilty of
an epidemic in this populous region.

— The current Western strategy of combating AIDS—information
and prophylaxis—is unlikely to be effective in most of Africa.
Condom use, perhaps the single best hope for lessening the
catastrophic spread of the virus, is culturally unpopular and
unlikely to gain widespread acceptance. f |

3
x
Page-7
SECRI
NOFORN, \CT/ORCON

AIDS has an apparent 100-percent mortality, no preventive
vaccine, and no cure. The disease is spreading rapidly and is out of con-
trol, especially among some urban African populations. It hits hardest at
the healthy, productive, 15-to-50 age group which composes nearly one-
half of Sub-Saharan Africa’s 466 million population. Rates of infection,
already estimated to be as high as 15 to 25 percent in some urban
groups, are rising, with little prospect that any method of intervention
within the next few years will slow the epidemic. The numbers of HIV-
infected people could grow to several tens of millions in ten years

Affluence, mobility, and lifestyle have put a disproportionate
number of urban elites at risk of infection. The World Health
Organization has informally estimated that Africa stands to lose at least
15 percent of its educated people in the next 15 years. Most in the small
elite establishment, if they escape the disease themselves, will be
touched personally by the death of family, relatives, and friends. For
example, Zambian President Kaunda recently lost a son to AIDS, and
Ugandan President Museveni’s brother, Army Cdr. Salim Saleh, is dying
of AIDS. Leaders are helpless to prevent AIDS or treat the victims, and

their sense of frustration may bring some to lash out at Western
countries,

Young elites face a curtailment in educational opportunities as
West European, Soviet Bloc, and some Third World countries insist on
blood tests for African students and visitors, and expulsion if found to be
HIV infected. Such expulsions have already occurred from a growing
list of Western, Communist, and Third World countries. The next
generation of African leaders, cut off from wide exposure to outside
ideas and methods, could become excessively isolated and embittered
over treatment they see as singling out Africans unfairly. Those who
survive the AIDS crisis may carry these negative views into future
dealings with the countries that rejected them and their peers. | |

Rural areas in most countries have been thought to have lower
infection rates, but these areas may simply be three to five years behind
the cities rather than somehow at less risk. Already, urban-to-rural
spread of HIV is being traced through increasing rates of infection along
major transportation routes. The lack of surveillance and diagnostic
capability in rural areas may lead to low recognition of the extent of the
spread of the disease. There are anecdotal accounts of near depopula-
tion of some isolated communities in Uganda and Rwanda.

The long-range impact of AIDS will be devastating. Heavily
infected countries will suffer irreplaceable population losses in those
groups most essential to their future development: midlevel economic

4

-
Page-8
Ss
NOFO! ‘ONTRACT/ORCON

and political managers, agrarian and urban workers, and military
personnel. The future may also show that neurological damage among
the HIV infected is one of the virus’s most destructive aspects.
Increasing numbers of seemingly healthy people may be lost to the
work force, or the managerial and decisionmaking abilities of leaders
may be seriously impaired by progressive memory loss, motor impair-
ment, psychiatric symptoms, chronic dementia, or other central nervous
system disorders. Young mothers and their newborn babies are suffering
relatively high rates of infection, and their loss could seriously under-

mine the traditional family, which will have to bear the brunt of caring
for the ill and dying.

Almost all African economies are under severe strain already, The
impact of AIDS-related consequences—loss of trained managers and
technicians, loss of tourism, and increasing disinclination of foreigners to
reside in Africa—will almost certainly reinforce current capital flight
and growing decline of foreign capital investment

   

Soviet Bloc countries are likely to alienate young African elites by
their policies towards AIDS. The testing and deportation of infected
African students from Soviet Bloc countries have brought allegations
of racial and political bias from African media. These actions may also
undermine the Soviet disinformation campaign blaming the spread of
AIDS on the United States. African visitors who come from countries
where AIDS is rampant will face increased social segregation, even if
they test free of AIDS, as host country populations react to public
information accounts of the magnitude of the disease in Africal

The Soviet Bloc faces an additional serious problem. In 1986 there
were 10,000 Soviet economic technicians in Africa and nearly 4,000
military advisers. Cuba maintains about 37,500 military and 6,000
civilian personnel in Angola alone. AIDS will raise the cost for Havana
and Moscow, and could eventually weaken their resolve to maintain
current levels of troops and advisers in Africa, although there is no
indication that the Soviet-Cuban commitment is wavering at this time.
Military and civilian personnel will face rigorous testing upon return

from Africa

5

oe
Page-9
The United States and other Western countries will probably be
asked to increase greatly their assistance to Africa. A refusal to divert
or create new development funds to take on the enormous costs of
upgrading health infrastructures will open the doors to harsh criticism
by beleaguered African countries. The Soviets will probably step up
their anti-US disinformation campaign in the wake of an African
backlash, and the United States will continue to need a vigorous counter
to such propaganda. Renewed Soviet accusations that US military
personnel spread AIDS could lead to more troublesome and contentious
negotiations for military basing agreements and other military activities.
Donors’ calls for more openness and publication of data will provoke
African leaders who believe data outlining the extent of the epidemic
tarnishes their image and is used against them economically. A fall in
tourist revenues, mandatory testing of African students, and the possi-
bility of visa and immigration restrictions will inflame anti-Western
rhetoric and negatively affect bilateral relations. Ha
Page-10
SECI
NOFORN/!

 

TRACT/ORCON

DISCUSSION

Introduction

1. AIDS could cause greater dislocation, death, and
illness in Africa than any combination of famine,
drought, or war. The World Health Organization
estimates that so far at least 50,000 Africans have died
of the disease, and another 2 to 5 million are infected
with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and
are capable of transmitting the virus throughout their

lifetime. Hl

2. Of those currently infected, a minimum of
400,000 to a high of 1.5 million could develop AIDS
within 5 years, with death to follow soon after the
clinical symptoms appear. Conservative estimates are
that 20 to 30 percent of carriers will develop AIDS
within five years of initial infection. Data suggest that
the risk of progression from HIV infection to AIDS
increases with time: an estimated 50 to 90 percent will
progress to AIDS within 10 years of infection. Only
time will tell whether infection invariably leads to

AIDS.

8. The scope and intensity of the AIDS pandemic in
Africa are difficult to assess precisely. The vast major-
ity of Africans do not have access to even the most
rudimentary health care; disease surveillance systems
and diagnostic equipment are grossly inadequate;

   
   

Nonetheless, the progression o!
the pandemic can roadly outlined from a limited

number of small surveys and published medical stud-
ies.

4. The rapid increase in AIDS and HIV carriers in
the last five years is unquestioned. For instance, if we
rely only on statistics from established medical organi-
zations where scientific testing is available, the in-
crease in diagnosed cases and carriers among only
those patients with access to medical care is deeply
troubling and represents only the tip of the iceberg.

— In Uganda, hospital physicians in Kampala did
not see any AIDS cases in 198]; in 1984 they saw
one or two cases per month on average; in 1985,
one or two cases per week; and in the first six

 

months of 1986, one or two cases per day. 1986
data from blood donors at a Kampala hospital
show that 12.6 percent of 2,000 young male
donors were HIV infected, as were 13.5 percent
of 1,000 women at a maternity clinic. Early
indications from 1987 studies show that well over
20 percent of Kampala blood donors were infect-
ed, and among prenatal women the rate was
about 24 percent.

— At University Hospital in Lusaka, Zambia, be-
tween August 1985 and December 1986 the
number of referrals for persons suspected of
having AIDS doubled every eight months, a total
of 1,700 patients over the period. Hospital au-
thorities estimate that there will be about 1,000
patients per month with clinical AIDS during the
first half of 1987.

— In Kenya, blood tests confirmed 10 cases in 1984
among patients suspected of having AIDS; be-
tween 100 and 200 confirmed cases in 1985; and
400 cases in the first eight months of 1986 out of
1,200 patients tested. Among blood donors at
Nairobi hospital, the number of HIV carriers
increased from 1.2 percent in 1985 to 2.2 percent
in 1986. A documented study of 90 prostitutes, a
high-risk group, found that 54 percent were HIV
infected in 1985, and that the same group is now
80 percent infected. Indications are that 4 per-
cent of pregnant women at a large Nairobi
maternity hospital were carriers.

— Only a handful of Zairians sought treatment for
AIDS in Europe in 1982, but today the govern-
ment-established research group, Project SIDA,
estimates that 8 percent of the urban population
are HIV infected, with a 2-percent infection rate
in the general population. ay

Factors Contributing to the Rapid Spread of
AIDS

Sexual Mores and Cultural Factors

5. Heterosexual transmission is the major way the
virus is spread in Africa, and the culturally traditional
behavior of having multiple sexual partners increases
the risk. Educational programs in some countries, such
Page-11
Presence of AIDS Worldwide, 1 April 1987*

 

 

 

  
 

* AIDS medically verifie
reported to the World

 

.d and voluntarily
Health Organization.

     
 

"The United States Government Ras not recognized
th ration of Eaton, Latvia, and Lithuania
i Use I boundary representation
{nol necessary authortaive.

  

 

 

(“1 Countries reporting
100 cases or more>-c

Australia
Belgium

Brazil

Burundi*
Canada

Central African Republic
Congo

France

Haiti

Italy

Wvory Coast
Kenya

Mexico
Netherlands
Rwanda

Spain
Switzerland
Trinidad and Tobago
Uganda*

United Kingdom
United States
Tanzania

West Germany
Zaire®

Zambia
Zimbabwe

Unclassified

(1 Countries reporting
fewer than 100 cases®

Angola

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Austria
Bahamas.The
Barbados
Belize

Benin

Bermuda
Bolivia
Botswana
Cameroon
Cayman Islands
Chad

Chile

China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba

Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador

East Germany
EI Salvador

 

 

Finland
French Guiana
Gambia. The
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guinea
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
ireland®
Israel
Jamaica
Japan
Lesotho
Liberia
Luxembourg
Malawi
Matta
Martinique
Mozambique
New Zealand
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru

Philippines

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Saint Christopher and Nevis

Saint Lucia

Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines

Singapore

South Africa

Soviet Union

Sri Lanka

Suriname

Sweden

Taiwan

Thailand

Tunisia

Turkey

Turks and Caicos Istands

Uruguay

Venezuela

Yugoslavia

© Number of cases reported range
from 100 to 35,000.

© Due to lack of reporting and
poor reporting procedures, the
actual number of cases is much
higher.

Collateral data suggests high
incidence of AIDS.

710423 (02683) 6-87

 

eee
Page-12
s
NOFO! ONTRACT/ORCON

Presence of AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1 April 1987"

 
 
  
    
  

North Atlantic
Ocean

   
  
 
 
 
   

Mauritania
Cape
3 Verde “SSea\.
: je ee
Senegal \
The Gambia xx, Sudan A
*

Djibout!

Gunea-Bisaw2C
Sierra Ledne,
tberia)e

Ethiopia 7

/
- Sonali
somalia
oe
Y

South, Seychelles
Atlantic
Ocean Indian

Ocean

 

 

Country reporting
100 or more cases

[1 Country reporting
fewer than 100 cases

Country or city where
collateral data show
a high incidence

of AIDS

© AIDS medically verified and
voluntarily reported to the
World Health Orgenization.
Due to Jack of reporting and
poor reporting procedures,
the actual number of cases ° 1000 Kilometers
is much higher. —_———,

 

 

 

° 1000 Miles
Boundary representation is

 

 

 

‘not necessarly authoritative

. | 710424 (800206) 6-87
Page-13
si
NOFO!

as in Congo, Kenya, Burundi, Uganda, and others,
recommend limiting sexual contact to one partner.
Openly addressing sexual behavior is new and contro-
versial, however, and personal sensitivities, relatively
low literacy levels, and very limited media access will
limit the impact of the campaigns among those coun-
tries that adopt them. In Kenya, the release of a TV
series early this year depicting the hazards of casual
sex caused a storm of disapproval in parliament and
the series was cancelled. Neither a medical break-
through, nor a reordering of lifestyles, will come in
time to change the worsening health crisis.

6. Condom use is perhaps the single best hope for
lessening the catastrophic spread of the virus today. In
many countries, however, condoms are associated with
prostitutes, not with family relationships, making their
universal acceptance difficult in the next five years.
Only 1 percent of the world’s use of condoms is in
Africa. Even where there is a demand, they are often
in short supply or unavailable. In Burundi a thriving
black market in condoms has started, along with the
sale of several “homemade” products of dubious reli-

ability
Inadequate Health Systems

7. Health systems are already grossly inadequate,
and the further economic drain from the AIDS pan-
demic on financially strapped African governments

ONTRACT/ORCON,

will be profound. For most African countries, upgrad- |

ing blood transfusion services alone is likely to cost
approximately 30 times the annual per capita public
health budget, according to a documented 1986 study.
In Uganda, annual per capita spending on health care
is $1.60, roughly the cost of one preliminary blood test
for AIDS,

8. Even though the costs of upgrading may be
prohibitive in many countries, contaminated blood
supplies rank as an important contributor to the spread
of the virus. In Zaire, where blood screenings began
only recently, a Project SIDA study at one hospital
found that 10 percent of all blood donated over a
period of one month tested positive; with a minimum
of 2,000 transfusions per month, hundreds of new HIV
carriers could have been generated. In contrast, the
Rwanda Government ordered the screening of all
blood donations in December 1985, and it now has a
theoretically clean stock.

9. The costs of controlling the spread could be
dwarfed by the bill of treating AIDS patients, and so it
is probable that most will remain untreated. African
governments and physicians will have to make diffi-
cult choices that are rooted in ethics. An official in

Zaire recently said on an internationally televised
program that treatment of AIDS victims was out of the
question if treatment of curable diseases were to
continue. The cost of caring for 10 AIDS patients in
the United States is greater than the entire budget of a
large hospital in Zaire.

10. Health gains realized through vaccination pro-
grams and the acquisition of medicines by injection
may be put in jeopardy. The fear that dirty needles
spread the virus may lead to rejection of these medical
services unless the lack of sterile needles can be
overcome. In regional health clinics in northern
Malawi, medical personnel say that “educated” pa-
tients, aware of the AIDS problem, insist on new
needles for their injections, while syringes for “villa-
gers” are dipped in boiling water and reused because
of the short supply,

Effect of Other Endemic Diseases

11. Because the fundamental AIDS problem is the
immune deficiency caused by HIV, infection by the
virus leads to a worsening of endemic diseases. The
survival time after diagnosis has been shorter in Africa
than in Western countries, according to limited medi-
eal studies. This is probably because most people
exposed to the virus are already medically compro-
mised by malnutrition and various diseases, including
hepatitis, malaria, schistosomiasis, tuberculosis, and
sexually transmitted diseases, and because they seek
medical help in the late stages of the disease. WHO
reports that tuberculosis epidemics are occurring in
areas where there are HIV epidemics. Acute malaria is
often treated by blood transfusion because of severe
anemia, raising the risk of HIV infection. Some treat-
able, slowly progressing cancers long known in Africa,
such as Kaposi’s sarcoma, take an aggressive fatal form
in AIDS patients. Sexually transmitted diseases, espe-
cially widespread in African cities, may facilitate
transmission of HIV by allowing the virus to enter the

bloodstream through open genital sores. ||

A Second Virus

12. A second AIDS virus identified as HIV-2 could
contribute to the wider spread of the AIDS epidemic,
particularly in West Africa. French researchers have
confirmed infection by HIV-2 in 80 West African
patients, of whom 17 had AIDS. Although genetically
different from the HIV virus found in other countries,
HIV-2 is related and can cause AIDS. The emergence
of HIV-2 vastly complicates vaccine development, and
blood-screening tests will have to be modified to

pinpoint the new virus. in
Page-14
NOFOR!

SE!

INTRACT/ORCON

 

A Description of AIDS and HIV

The geographic and biologic origins of Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) are not clear.
Although serological evidence indicates that AIDS could
have been present in Africa as early as 1959 and in the
United States in 1977, the disease now known as AIDS
was first noted in the medical literature in 1981. Several
outbreaks of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and Ka-
posi’s sarcoma, diseases usually seen only in persons
with well-documented immune system compromise,
occurred in previously healthy young male homosexuals
in New York and California in the early 1980s. Early
hypotheses on the cause of the syndrome centered on
certain aspects of the lifestyle of male homosexuals,
including use of recreational drugs and promiscuity.
However, as more AIDS victims other than male homo-
sexuals became known, circumstantial evidence pointed
to an infectious agent, such as a virus, as being the cause
of AIDS. (u)

 
 

Research conducted in the United States and France
culminated in nearly simultaneous announcements
from both countries in 1983 that a virus causing AIDS
had been found. The agent was termed “lymphadeno-
pathy-associated virus” (LAV) by the French, “human
T-cell lymphotropic virus type III” (HTLV-II) by the
Americans. Since that time, the agent also has been
known as “AIDS Associated Retrovirus” (ARV), and
most recently, “Human Immunodeficiency Virus”
(HIV). HIV now has been accepted as standard termin-
ology by most workers in the field. The nomenclature
became more confused in 1986 by the discovery of two
more human retroviruses in Africa. One, now called
HTLV-IV, was found in healthy Senegalese, and the
other, first called LAV-2, now HIV-2, was isolated from
AIDS patients in West Africa. HIV-2 appears to cause
AIDS, HTLV-IV does not. However, not all researchers
are in agreement as to the relationship between these
two viruses and AIDS. Also, other viruses have been
isolated from monkeys in Central Africa, and genetic
similarities noted between these monkey (simian) virus-
es and HTLV-IV point to the possible evolution of HIV
from a simian virus. (v)

All agents associated with AIDS are retroviruses. The
genetic information of these viruses is encoded in
single-strand ribonucleic acid (RNA). In order for the
virus to replicate and to become integrated into the
chromosomes of an infected cell, the viral RNA first
must be transcribed into double-strand deoxyribonucle-
ic acid (DNA) by means of an enzyme, reverse tran-
scriptase. This RNA-DNA flow of information is the

reverse (“retro”) of most genetic message movement,
and is the source of the virus’ family name, “Retroviri-
dae.” (v)

This retrovirus family currently contains three sub-
families with HIV provisionally placed in the Lentivir-
inae (“slow viruses”). The lentivirinae (and HIV) are
characterized by a lengthy latent (incubation) period
between initial infection and expression of symptoms.
In the case of HIV, this incubation can last for years
The best current estimate is that 20 to 80 percent of
HIV-infected individuals will progress to AIDS within 5
years of initial infection with HIV, and time will tell
whether HIV infection invariably progresses to AIDS.
Some authorities believe that an individual infected
with either HIV or HIV-2 remains infective for life,
regardless of whether AIDS symptoms are ever ex-
pressed. (u)

Although no consensus exists as to what actually
triggers AIDS disease progression, most hypotheses in-
clude co-infection by another agent. Co-infection could
activate the AIDS virus through continual immune
stimulation. For example, samples of two groups having
a high prevalence of AIDS (homosexual males in the
United States and heterosexual males in Zaire) also were
found to have a very high prevalence—90 to 100
percent—of hepatitis B, cytomagelovirus, and Epstein-
Barr virus. Co-infection also could trigger AIDS pro-
gre: via the immune system’s own chemical com-
munication system. HIV sequestered in T-lymphocytes
could become activated when the lymphocytes respond
to a chemical message indicating attack by another
agent. (u)

 

Human genetic variability also could affect any AIDS
activation hypothesis. Recent research indicates that an
inherited factor may enhance either one’s susceptibility
or resistance to progression from HIV infection to
AIDS. (uv)

Prospects for development of either an effective cure
for HIV infection or an AIDS vaccine in the near term
are not good. The very nature of HIV makes the virus a
difficult target. Not only does HIV sequester itself
intimately in a vital portion of the human immune
system, it is also genetically unstable. Although the
situation is not hopeless, even optimistic medical au-
thorities believe that any effective AIDS vaccine or
therapy is at least five to 10 years away. Until then,
prevention of AIDS will depend almost entirely on the
effectiveness of public education programs and other
measures designed to reduce risk of exposure to HIV.

(v)

 

iW
Page-15
NOF!

13, It is possible that more HIV strains may be
identified, or other transmission vectors discovered,
which will add_new complexities to control and pre-
vention efforts.

Prospects for Epidemic Spread

14, Clinical AIDS has an apparent 100-percent
mortality, no preventive vaccine, and no cure. The
AIDS menace is growing and out of control in many
African countries. It will ravage the populations of
central, eastern, and southern Africa, and probably
will spread disastrously through relatively untouched

West Africa

15. AIDS threatens sexually active 15-to-50-year-
old males and females, nearly one-half of Sub-Saharan
Africa’s 466 million population. Rates of infection are
rising, with little prospect that any method of inter-
vention within the next few years will significantly
slow the epidemic. The magnitude and progression of
the AIDS disaster are alarming, and the future, at least
for the next decade, appears grim,

16. The number of HIV-infected people could grow
to several tens of millions by the end of the century.
The educated urban class is at high risk. WHO has
informally calculated that Africa stands to lose at least
15 percent of its educated people to AIDS and AIDS-
related illnesses in the next 15 years. Estimated rates
for the cities and some high-risk groups indicate the
intensity of the growing catastrophe:

—One out of five residents of Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania, are estimated to be carriers,

— Researchers in Kampala, Uganda, warn that HIV
infection has probably doubled every year for
the past three years with possibly 1 million
Ugandans infected; the sexually active urban
population is estimated 25 percent infected; the
Army tested 33 percent HIV infected; and HIV
and AIDS prevalence may be the same in the
countryside as it is in the cities.

—In Bujumbura, Burundi, infection rates have
risen over the past year from 7 to 18.5 percent,
pregnant wom > Infection rates
ranged from 12 to 30 percent.

— In Zambia, approximately 15 to 20 percent of the
urban population may be HIV-infected, accord-
ing to studies
Among 908 pi ) Ov
infected as were 98 percent of their newborn

ONTRACT/ORCON

children. Among high-risk male groups, Air
Force officer blood donors were 85 percent
infected, midlevel bank professionals were 25
percent infected, and, in one sizable study of
infected men in the urban copperbelt, 68 percent
of those infected were skilled professionals.

— In Kigali, Rwanda, the infection rate is an esti-
mated 25 percent, up from 17 percent a year and
a half ago,
[The
igures will mean astounding urban mor-
tality in five to 10 years, and they further note
the likelihood of increasing deaths from tubercu-
losis, hepatitis, and other diseases.

— Blood testing in Zimbabwe's cities resulted in
estimates for urban populations ranging from a
conservative 3.5 percent infected to highs of 17
percent in some areas. Over 50 percent of enlist-
ed men, randomly selected from all Army battal-
ions, were found to be HIV-infected in early

17. The countryside, where infection rates are gen-
erally thought to be lower, may simply be three to five
years behind the cities rather than somehow at less
risk. There is little doubt that AIDS will advance into
the rural areas. The advance will follow transportation
routes and refugee and military movements. The lack

‘of a capability to diagnose AIDS or test for the virus

may lead to low recognition of the extent of the
epidemic. In remote regions of Rwanda, the rate of 1.5
percent of a year ago has risen to 2.5 percent today,
and along major roads to a high of 8.5 percent. Other
countries also report an acceleration in the urban to
tural spread, while anecdotal reports tell of some
isolated communities in Uganda and Rwanda that
have been nearly depopulated by AIDS.

18. Increases in AIDS among infants and children
can be expected. WHO estimates that at least one-half
of newborns of infected mothers will be themselves
infected, and that most will die within two years.
Older children, previously thought to be relatively
safe, are also at risk. In a northern Zambian town, a
Western doctor estimates that 4 percent of 6-to-10-
year-olds treated for cerebral malaria were infected
by blood transfusions from relatives. Dirty needles
used at clinics and for ritual scarring purposes also
endanger children,

19. It is unlikely that any country will be spared,
and most are tentatively trying to address the problem.
AIDS has already spread south to South Africa and to
the islands of Madagascar and Cape Verde. Blood

ge
Page-16
SE

testing will start soon in Mozambique’s provincial
capitals and in all of Swaziland. Some refuse to
acknowledge the magnitude of the problem. For
example, Zimbabwean officials report 2 percent of
blood donors infected, while medical officers privately
estimate rates as high as 17 percent in some urban
areas; 50 percent of a sample of Zimbabwean Army
enlisted men tested HIV-infected. AIDS patients in
Cape Verde and among South Africa’s white popula-
tion are primarily homosexual or bisexual, mirroring
AIDS patterns in Western countries rather than their
African neighbors; little is known of AIDS incidence in
South Africa’s black population. i

Complicating Factors

20. Present conditions are grim, and there is a
strong probability that the scope of the epidemic is
understated. Infection rates and cases of clinical AIDS
could be much higher than have so far been estimated
because of the lack of technical expertise and re-
sources. Little is medically known about rural areas,
where the majority of Africans live and where large
numbers of cases could reasonably be expected to go
undetected, both in countries with high incidence of
the virus as well as in others that consider themselves
so far unaffected. Epidemics of measles, tuberculosis,
and other endemic diseases could well get a foothold
in AIDS-weakened populations and spread quickly to
others, raising the death toll immeasurably |

21. The massive spread of AIDS into populous West
Africa is a probability, given the presence of a new
virus strain, contact with people from heavily infected
areas, similar sexual mores, and a lack of urgency to
start educational campaigns. The number of carriers
and victims could be enormous in its large population
and teeming cities, and it is no more prepared medi-
cally or economically for a health disaster than is
central or eastern Africa|

22. So far, West African countries have reported
few AIDS cases, and little is known about possible HIV
carriers. Ivory Coast has published the most sweeping
data so far; a 1985 study showed 6.8 percent of 900
persons from all geographic regions were infected, 34
percent of 150 prostitutes, and 118 confirmed AIDS
cases, Nigeria is opening blood screening centers in
seven cities, and Niger, Ghana, Burkina, and others
with few or no confirmed cases acknowledge the need
for educational campaigns.

28. Of increasing concern is the serious risk of HIV-
related neurological disease. The future may show that
neurological damage, which may occur without other
symptoms of clinical AIDS, is one of the virus’s most

   
 

 

    

ITRACT/ORCON

destructive aspects. Infection of the central nervous
system seems to be responsible for a variety of disor-
ders that can be severe, including progressive memory
loss, motor impairment, meningitis, encephalitis, psy-
chiatric symptoms, and chronic dementia. Even with-
out the full development of AIDS, increasing numbers
of people—who may otherwise appear healthy—will
be lost to the work force, and the managerial and
decisionmaking ability of the bureaucracy and leaders

could be seriously impaired

Implications
Africa

24, Affluence, mobility, and lifestyle have put a
disproportionate number of elites at risk of infection.
Most of the compact establishment in countries where
AIDS is epidemic will be touched personally by the
death of family or acquaintances. There will be little
leaders can do in the short run to prevent AIDS or
treat its victims. Some may lash out at the West for
what they view as inadequate assistance, or become
even more vulnerable to Soviet disinformation blam-
ing AIDS on the United States. Governments’ inability
to stem the crisis and desire to find a foreign scapegoat
could result in the rise of anti-Western, xenophobic
religious or political movements.

(See annex: AIDS Disinformation Campaigns

rica.)

25. For young elites, a foreign education is now
threatened by the AIDS epidemic sweeping through
the African upper classes. Military and civilian stu-
dents from Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimba-
bwe, Malawi, and Zaire have been tested and sent
home from Third World, Soviet Bloc, and Western
countries. To avoid the perceived disgrace, leaders
may curtail sending students abroad. The next genera-
tion of African leaders, cut off from wide exposure to
outside ideas and methods, could become excessively
isolated and embittered and carry these negative views
into future dealings with the rest of the world. The
attempt by some countries to restrict free international
movement or disproportionately test Africans for
AIDS will increase bilateral misunderstandings and
add to leaders’ concerns that Africans are being
unfairly singled out

   

in

26. General commercial disarray could follow rising
death tolls or incapacity in management sectors and
further depress the economy. The concentration of
AIDS in important mining, industrial, and population
centers, and its probable spread to rural areas, will
adversely affect trade, commercial activity, and agri-
cultural production. The diminution of tourism—
Page-17
SE
NOF

already down by 25 percent in Kenya after the
Western media warned of the AIDS epidemic—will
cause extensive economic damage in countries depen-
dent on tourist revenues.

27. The rapid spread of AIDS also has important
security implications for many African countries. The
mission and capabilities of both the armed forces and
internal security forces will be adversely affected by
AIDS because of:

— Restrictions on the young male manpower pool.

—Loss of trained,
technicians.

experienced officers and

— Restrictions on military students going abroad for
training.

— Restrictions on the number of foreign military
advisers in-country.

— Restrictions on training and exercises with for-
eign forces.

— Aggravation of low morale and discipline
problems.

— Problems with the military civic action role of
some forces—they could actually contribute to
the spread of AIDS to rural areas.

28, In addition, the rising incidence of AIDS could
lead to both heightened tension within a state’s
borders and between African states. If AIDS breaks
out in a particular area, travel restrictions could be
imposed and certain regions of a country could
become isolated, even quarantined. Potential border
closings could result in tense political relations, diplo-
matic isolation, and the disruption of key trade and
commercial links, all of which might engender a
military response.

29. The long-range impact of AIDS will be devas-
tating as the loss of today’s productive population
stunts future development. The demographics indi-
cate that heavily infected countries will experience
significant losses of economic and political middle
managers, much of the urban and agrarian work
force in some countries, and high proportions of their
military personnel. Young mothers who have deliv-
ered in urban clinics and their babies have very high
infection rates. If these estimated levels are found to
apply to large numbers of women, the ensuing
widespread illness and death could seriously under-
mine traditional families, which will need to bear the
brunt of caring for the ill and dying as overburdened
and underfunded health services struggle with the

 

 
  

INTRACT/ORCON

The Soviet Bloc
30.

 

The West

34. Controversies over mandatory testing of stu-
dents, media stories that warn tourists of the dangers of
AIDS in Africa, and putting high-risk cities off-limits

ge
Page-18
NOF

to Western military personnel have already strained
relations between some Western and African coun-
tries. It has been mostly Western researchers who
have released detailed studies of the disease, often
denied by African official spokesmen. African leaders
have protested the tarnished image and economic
penalties they say follow release of data on the
prevalence of AIDS. With the crisis deepening, the
intensity of such misunderstanding will probably in-

The United States

35. The United States, along with other Western
countries, will be asked to step up assistance to
beleagured Africa. However, development assistance
resources are already scarce and the costs of upgrading
low-level health systems in most countries are ex-
tremely high. The supply of basic health resources,
such as condoms, syringes, and other medical goods
will probably meet with cries for more far-reaching
aid. Donors’ calls for more openness and the collection
of hard data will provoke African leaders, who believe
such data are used against them. Zz

‘ONTRACT/ORCON

86. US tourist, government, and business personnel
are likely to face increased health dangers. Safe sexual
practices are a major safeguard against HIV, but the
tisk of infection by contaminated blood transfusion or
unsterile equipment during emergencies will be high.
Some businesses may decide to cut risks to their
personnel by curtailing or suspending operations in
Africa.

37. Attempts to insulate Western societies from
Africa’s experience will serve to inflame anti-Western
rhetoric, and may have a long-lasting effect on every
aspect of Western-African relations. Negotiations by
the West for military basing agreements, port calls,
and aircraft landing privileges may become more
contentious amid accusations, fed by the disinforma-
tion campaign, that Western and US military person-
nel carry and spread AIDS. The life and death struggle
in Africa will push leaders to keep the loyalty of their
populations by seeking a scapegoat. In the short term
at least, the United States and Western countries
appear to offer only the future hope for a vaccine or
cure, while currently denying the massive assistance
that would be needed to care for the victims and raise

health services to developed-world standards
Page-19
s
NOFOR!

'ONTRACT/ORCON:

ANNEX

AIDS Disinformation Campaign

Introduction

 

Themes

Drawing on its worldwide campaign, which claims
that the United States developed and caused the
spread of AIDS, Moscow’s first African effort was an
April 1986 radiobroadcast in English warning of the
danger of AIDS-infected US servicemen from ships
and airbases visiting Mombasa, Kenya. A variation of
this theme appeared in conjunction with an April 1987
US-Zairian military exercise in which an English-
language Moscow Radio broadcast to southern Africa
reported that the United States was deliberately
spreading AIDS in southern Zaire to test a new

biological weapon

Exploiting black African sensitivities to racism and
so-called Western imperialism, Moscow has taken full
advantage of regional fears, ignorance, and some
careless Western statements in its efforts to provoke
anti-US sentiment. For example:

— We believe Moscow probably had a hand in a
campaign by a radical Nigerian youth group in
July 1986 that resulted in “letters to the editor”
of Kenyan, Senegalese, and Ugandan newspapers
warning of AIDS-infected blood supplies from
North America and Western Europe and charg-
ing that AIDS came from Fort Detrick, Mary-
land. The appearance of these letters before the
July OAU summit may have been intended to
add to the anti-US tone of the meeting.

7

— The most enduring contribution to the African—
and worldwide—AIDS campaign has been a
pseudoscientific study by East Germans Jakob
and Lilli Segal and Ronald Demhlow, which
appeared in Zimbabwe shortly before the Non-
aligned Movement summit convened in Harare
at the end of August 1986. The study asserted
that AIDS could not have originated in Africa
and was in fact the product of laboratory testing
at Fort Detrick. Made available to a large Third
World audience in Harare, this lengthy creation
has since appeared in dozens of countries world-
wide and been serialized for weeks in Tanzanian,
Ghanaian, and other African newspapers despite
frequent and repeated US denials of the Segal
allegations.

— A Ghanian newspaper reported in January 1987
~ that the United States intended to use Africans as
guinea pigs to test AIDS vaccines.

—A Ugandan weekly newspaper in the same
month alleged that CIA agents disguised as scien-
tists and journalists were claiming that 10 percent
of Ugandans have AIDS in order to prove that
Africa, rather than the United States, is the

source of the disease

Implications

The Soviet AIDS disinformation campaign—like
most Soviet active measures—has been highly oppor-
tunistic. In addition to introducing its own allegations,
Moscow also plays back to Third World audiences
events like the UK declaration of Kenya as off-limits to
British military personnel on leave; this reinforces
Soviet claims of Western racism and imperialism
Although there is no evidence that the AIDS fabrica-
tions have had any serious effect on African relations
with the United States, a few press reports this year
have focused on US military personnel and American
tourists as sources of AIDS. We believe that the United
States is vulnerable to an African backlash, much as
Britain and others have been, not simply because of
Moscow's campaign, but because of the high potential
that US policy statements and media reports on AIDS
will be seen by African audiences as being racially

motivated. ||

ao
Page-20
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was disseminated by the Directoraty
sensitive nature of some source material reflected
information and use of the recipient only.

Intelligence. Because of the
in, this copy is for the exclusive

2. This document may be retained, or destr,
security regulations, or returned to the Dir;

3. When this document is dissemi
period not in excess of one year.
or returned to the forwardi
agency to retain it in aces

4. The title of this

Mi by burning in accordance with applicable
ate of Intelligence.

‘overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it for a
fe end of this period, the document should be destroyed
fency, or permission should be requested of the forwarding
Ince with |AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

ument when used separately from the text is Confidential.
Page-21

Page-22
SECRET RACT ORCON
¢ Director of Central Intelligence

Washington, D.C. 20505 &
National Intelligence Council 29 May 1987

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Stephen Danzansky
Room 365, Old Executive Office Building
National Security Council

Ambassador Herman J. Cohen
Room 373, Old Executive Office Building
National Security Council

Mr. Eric Melby

Special Assistant to the Undersecretary for Economics
Room 7256, New State

Department of State

ssistant National Intelligence Officer for Africa

SUBJECT: SNIE 70/1-87, Sub-Saharan Africa:
Implications of the AIDS Pandemic ||

 

1. Attached is a draft of the captioned Special National Intelligence
Estimate that was coordinated by Intelligence Community Representatives on
27 May 1987. The National Foreign Intelligence Board is scheduled to approve
this draft on 2 June--thus some minor changes are possible--but I thought that
an advance copy might be of use to you because AIDS is on the agenda for the
Venice economic summit.

Rd
Att: As stated

SECRET NTRACT ORCON