
Page-1
a im
wo . stengi”Horom ay I 2s
Y

Testimony By CIA National Intelligence Council
Chairman Henry Rowen Before the. Senate Committee on
Ener and Natural Resources

February 18, 1983

~
\

 

Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the committee.

I welcome this opportunity to present the Central
Intelligence Agency's views on the world energy situation and its
implications. (u* aa

Our own analysis of the present oil market situation and
outlook is very similar to the testimony just presented by the
Department of Energy. We believe that a general cut in nominal
oil prices is highly likely in the coming weeks. The persistent
softness in the world oil market and growing financial
difficulties of several oil producers is contributing to this
possibility. Market weakness is due to a number of factors:

© Economic growth continues. weak and a recovery is not
now expected until the latter half of the year.

o Unseasonably warm weather in the Northern Hemisphere
has held oil and energy use sharply below normal winter
levels.

© Because consumption is lower than expected, inventories
remain surplus to company needs. Adding to the
pressure to reduce inventories is the perception that
purchases should be postponed because future prices

will be lower.

 

© Conservation and substitution away from oil continue

albeit at rates slower than the past three years.

rersscy De duate doom = @
Page-2
SECRET MOFORN

These factors have had a dramatic effect on the oil market:

© OPEC crude production has fallen from about 31 million
b/d in 1979 to only 17.2 million b/d in January.
February production may be one million b/d lower.

o Free World oil consumption has declined by 7 million
b/d to about 45 million b/d.

© Spot oil prices, which peaked in 1980 at about $44 per
barrel for African light crudes, fell to the present
level of about $29 per barrel, some $6-7 below official
prices. (S NF)

The next several weeks will be a critical period for the oil
market. Oil demand is trending sharply downward as consumption
remains weak and buyers postpone liftings in anticipation of a
future price. decline. :

© Confronted by a several hundred thousand barrel. per day
reduction in oil sales since the beginning of the year,
Mexico is now facing the prospect of either lowering
prices to increase sales or further reducing output.

oO The UK is under pressure to cut in prices amid falling
exports.

© Nigerian production in January fell to 800,000 b/d
compared with 1.4 million b/d during the fourth
quarter.

© Production in Saudi Arabia averaged 4.7 million b/d in

January with prospects of further declines in February.

saber Le rom
Page-3
secngenorons

So far individual oil producers have been reluctant to initiate a
price drop in an attempt to avoid provoking a round of
competitive price cuts by other producers. (S NF)

The demand outlook for the balance of 1983 offers little
relief for oil producers. Oil demand trends will depend on the
shape of the business cycle, the pace of energy conservation and
substitution and inventory patterns. Even with modest economic
growth of 2 percent in the OECD countries, demand for OPEC crude
oil, in our estimation, will average about 17.5-19 million b/d in
1983 no more than last year and possibly less. Surplus Free
World available capacity will average about 8 million b/d.

o We expect OECD energy consumption to be about the same
as in 1982. Non oil energy use will probably increase

soe .-by. about 1 million b/d o.e.

© Free World oil consumption is projected to fall by
about 1 percent to 44.5-45 million b/d including
refinery gain. Consumption is expected to remain far
below year earlier levels during the first half of 1983
before beginning to rise above 1982 levels later in the
year in response to the economic recovery.

© We expect non-OPEC supplies will rise by about 500,000
b/d in 1983 to 24.6 million b/d. This figure includes
natural gas liquids, net Communist exports and refinery
gain. Most of the increase will come from Mexico, the
North Sea, and Canada.

o Oil inventories are projected to fall again in 1983.

Companies are unloading stocks of oil as expectations

/ a

J
Page-4
Verne. AUCUKRN

of a fall in its price--possibly large--have
heightened, If inventories measured in terms of days
of supply were to be restored to those prevailing in
the late 1960s and early 1970s, before the increase in
the oil price in 1973, at least .5 billion barrels of
oil would be in surplus. Much or all of this might be
run down in 1983. If so, stock reductions would
average around 1.5 million b/d with most of the
decrease occuring in the first half of this year. (C)

Unless an agreement on production quotas or price cuts is
reached soon, Saudi Arabia and the other Arab producers in the
Persian Gulf will continue to bear the brunt of the sharp decline
in demand that is already underway. However, the Saudis have
little willingness to cut output further, and have threatened
price cuts of $2 to $4 per barrel to arrest eroding oil sales and
force a production sharing agreement. Such action, however,
would constitute a major policy shift by Riyadh, and the Saudis
realize that lower oil prices would not boost oil demand
appreciably in the short run. Moreover, such action could ignite
a series of price cuts by other producers or possible retaliation
by Tran av~ainst Saudi oil facilities. (c NF)

On balance, it is highly likely that oil prices will
decline. The OPEC states will probably succeed in preventing an
uncontrolled price decline by agreeing to a production sharing
arrangement in the coming weeks. OPEC members realize that

widespread price discounting could cause a price collapse that

i sccsey roan
Page-5
——S

s Poa

would lower revenues drastically for all producers in the short
run. (C) ;

Still we cannot rule out the possibility of a much larger
oil price decline. Since a $2-4 price decline would not increase
demand significantly for some time, oil producers would see their
total revenue fall. This would generate pressures, in the
absence of a viable production sharing scheme, for individual
producers to shave prices: in an attempt to their increase market
share. Moreover, political animosities between Saudi Arabia,
Iran, and Libya may be sufficient to override rational thinking
in favor of a more emotional response to setting prices. The
Saudis and their fellow members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
with huge financial reserves could more easily handle a drop in
revenues resulting from a price cut. They are also the world's aoa
lowest cost oil producers. In the long run they will gain
broduction share if the real price of oil is lower. (C)

In addition, if the expected economic recovery fails to
materialize and oil consumption continues to fall at a rapid rate
OPEC would have a more difficult time preventing a sharp price
decline. (C)

If prices begin to slide, we cannot predict how far they
might fall short of a price equivalent to the current cost of
production for marginal oil fields around the world. This cost
is uncertain but probably very low, perhaps under $10/b. At well
above that price, we believe OPEC members and other oil producers

would agree on some rationing scheme to arrest the price slide.

(c) 7

 

SECRET NORADAT :
“rrr err errr rr rrr rr rr a ee renee rrr er rr
Page-6
oN

secney ron

In any event, a drop in oil prices would have major impacts
on the world economy. There are substantial positive aspects
that could occur including:

o Lower inflation

o Higher economic growth

© Higher employment

© Lower oil import costs and
© Reduced interest rates. (c)

At the other extreme, lower oil prices could lead to
intensified international financial stress as well as increased
Third World politicak.instability. Unsettled conditions in key
oil exporting countries could eventually translate into a supply
disruption threatening an oil price runup well before the
positive impact of the initial price. decline worked its way
through the system. Sharply lower prices would also dampen
conservation, slow exploration and delay alternative energy
Ccevelopment. These effects could take time to be felt. In
contrast, the most immediate concern brought on by a sharp price
decline would be the risk of damage to the international
financial system from the impact on high debt countries that are
dependent on income from oil, especially Mexico. Nigeria,
Venezuela, Indonesia, and Egypt would also be in trouble. For
more details of the impact of an oil price decline-~both the
potential gains as well as the risks--see the attached DDI
Intelligence Assessment "The Global Implications of a Possible

Oil Price Decline." (c)
Page-7
SECRET MNNOFORN

Despite the substantial capacity cushion and outlook for a
soft oil market, the continuation of hostilities between Iran and
Iraq poses a risk to oil supplies. The outcome of the conflict
could affect the oil market in widely different ways. An
escalation of the conflict to neighboring states could disrupt
oil flows and eliminate the supply cushion. Alternatively, a
quick end to the war could allow Iraq to increase exports to
prewar levels within six-months. The addition of 2 million b/d

would add further to downward price pressures. (C)

Prospects and Risks Beyond 1983

If a sharp oil price decline is avoided this year, almost
all petroleum industry projections of oil and natural gas markets
indicate only moderate growth in consumption, ample supplies, and
little or no upward pressure on real prices well into the late
1980s. Over the next several years, real oil prices could
continue to decline as a result of a combination of lower-than-
expected oil demand, an increase in Mexican oil Production, and
an end to the Iran-Irag war. Major industrialized countries will
remain heavily dependent on imported oil, and West European —
countries and Japan will become increasingly dependent on
imported natural gas. If the market gradually tightens later in
the decade as it would if future non-OPEC supplies fail to grow
at their recent rate, the present cushion of surplus productive
capacity is likely to shrink and the market would become more

vulnerable to supply disruptions. (Cc)

a 1 an
eda
Page-8
SECRET/NOFORN

If, as is more likely, prices break in the near term, the
greater economic growth and in time higher oil consumption would
hasten this vulnerability period. Much uncertainty exists
regarding the response of oil users to sharply lower prices.

Some argue that demand will rebound quickly; others say that
because of structural changes in oil use, a sharp price drop will
not cause a major rebound early in oil demand. As between these
two views, there are strong reasons for expecting a slow _recovery
in oil demand even if the world economy grows strongly for
several years. For example, oil use by electric utilities has
shrunk dramatically in recent years around the world. it is most
unlikely that the utilities or their regulators will permit
growth in oil use to earlier levels. Anather example & use of
motor fuel, 2 the US, auto efficiency standards have built in
downward pressure on gasoline use. Moreover, the US is
increasing auto fuel taxes and other governments are likely to do

likewise as the price of oil falls. (C)

The Stable Market Scenario

Economic growth assumptions and energy price trends are
eritical in forecasting long-term energy demand. A small change
in annual GNP growth can cause a substantial change in energy
requirements. Most projections assume a Free World GNP growth of
3 percent annually during the 1980s. Even if GNP growth on
average approximates this level over the next several years, oil
demand could still change because of sharp variations in year-to-

year growth caused by the business cycle. (C)

eenrvcd& ancnon
Page-9
Ss sent wOrons

Most forecasts assume flat or declining real oil prices to
1985, with prices rising thereafter by 2 to 3 percent per year.
The price path, however, may not be a smooth one. Most forecasts
for 1990 expect the price of benchmark OPEC oil, the Saudi
Arabian light crude, to range from $27 to $37 per barrel in 1982
dollars even if prices tumble in the near term. Of course, the
record of most forecasts has been so poor that one should attach
little importance to their estimates. (C)

Barring an unexpected supply disruption, supplies of oil and
natural gas should be ample to meet anticipated Free World demand
at least through the 1980s. Most forecasters now expect oil
productive capacity in the Free World to average about 56-57
million b/d in the latter half of the decade. The objective
¥ange of uncertainty must be larger than this. A weak oil market
couleé cause some erosion in productive capacity later in the
decade. Industry projections indicate non-OPEC productive
capacity will increase slightly in the late 1980s, with growth in
Mexican capacity accounting for much of this increase. Except
during periods of unusual weakness in the oil market, non-OPEC
producers will be operating at or near capacity. (C)

Overall, we estimate that Free World oil consumption in the
late 1980s will approximate 48-55 million b/d--at least 3 million
b/d above 1982 levels. Given these consumption estimates and
non-OPEC supply forecasts, we believe that the demand for OPEC
oil will climb to about 26 million by the late 1980s. As a

result, the Free World will remain dependent on OPEC oil for

about half of total oil requirements. Most industry and
Page-10
“~

seonen ybrom

governinent forecasts expect OPEC oil productive capacity to
average several million b/d above the expected demand. This
includes a return of the combined productive capacity of Iran and
Iraq to pre-war levels. (c)

Under these circumstances, oil supplies could support
several years of fairly rapid economic expansion without strong
upward pressure on prices, possibly with a real oil price well
under $30 a barrel in 1982 dollars. Surplus productive capacity
through the late 1980s should be sufficient to protect the oil
market from all but major supply disruptions. This ample supply
situation should give the United States wider freedom in dealing
with individual oil-exporting countries than enjoyed in the
past. Oil exporters whose interests are inimical to ours--Libya,
for example--will not have the financial flexibility they have
previously enjoyed. Other exporters, however, including Nigeria,
Venzeuzéla, Indonesia, Mexico, and Egypt will have to cut back
imports further and could face economic austerity so severe it
may generate some degree of political instability. Countries
losing access to aid from OPEC nations also could face more

hardship. (S NF)

Oil Disruption Risks

These unsettled conditions in key exporting countries could
heighten the risk of a supply disruption, perhaps of major
proportions. | Such a disruption could drastically and quite
suddenly alter the energy picture. The oil price run-ups of the

1970s were direct results of major market disturbances:
Page-11
secret Morons

o Libya's move to reduce foreign company production in
1970, coincident with pipeline sabotage in Syria,
resulted in a 25 percent rise in oil prices,

© The 1973 Arab oil embargo supported a tripling of oil
prices and contributed to an abrupt curtailment of GNP
growth.

© Supply losses resulting from the Iranian revolution
contributed to-a doubling of oil prices between late
1979 and early 1980, (ce)

Although the odds are ayainst a major internal or external
disruption in oil exports in any particular exporting nation or
region, the probability. of some sort of disruption is quite
high. The uncertain political climate and recent escalation of
hostilities in the Middle East has heightened fears of a
potential supply disruption in that region, which is expected to
continue to account for about one-third of Free World oil
production, The Persian Gulf has a particularly high
‘concentration of petroleum production and export facilities
highly vulnerable to damage from war or sabotage. A change in
regime or political policies can also pose a threat to oil flow
patterns. (S NF)

The impact of a supply cutoff would depend on the nature of
the disruption. Despite the present supply cushion, the United
States and its allies could be hurt by deep, sustained Production
cuts that could occur under a variety of circumstances. Among

the possibilities that could occur are:
Page-12
. SECRET neon

© An expansion of the Iran-Irag war to other Persian Gulf
countries, which could affect as much as 17 million b/d
in oil productive capacity.
© Closure of the Strait of Hormuz, the only sea route
into the Indian Ocean from the Persian Gulf, would
produce a comparable disruption. More than 9 million
b/d of crude oil was shipped through Hormuz last year,
nearly 7 million b/d to OECD countries. Four pipelines
totalling close to 4 million b/d in export Capacity
circumvent the Strait, but these also are vulnerable to
disruption, and two transitting Syria are currently
closed for-political reasons.
© A disruption in Saudi Arabian oil. production could
( affect more than half of Persian Gulf oil supply
although prospects for political stability in Saudi
Arabia appear good.

© An Iranian victory in its war with Iraq would likely
result in greater instability in the Persian Gulf, and
heighten the threat to the Saudis and other
conservative regimes.

o The ever present threat of terrorist attacks against
key oil facilities could increase as a result of
Palestinian setbacks in Lebanon. (S$ NF)

Should a disruption occur, its impact would depend heavily
on the availability of energy supplies from surplus productive
capacity, alternative fuels such as coal and gas, and

stockpiles. To some extent, the impact of future oil disruptions
Page-13
-—™

SECRET NOFORN

will also be modified by a number of changes in energy use.
Price controls have been eliminated in several countries, more
efficient capital stock has been installed, and many industrial
oil users have converted to other fuels or developed a dual-fuel
capability. Stock drawdowns can play a major role in offsetting
lost oil supplies. Commercial stocks represent the bulk of oil
inventories held in consuming countries, however, and in several
past. disruptions oil companies have been reluctant to draw down
inventories beyond certain levels. Sizable strategic stockpiles
are located only in the United States, Japan, and West Germany.
At present, the foreign countries have no specific plans on how
to distribute this oil in the event of a crisis. (s)

Surplus productive capacity will afford the OECD
considerable protection against. an-oil disruption at least for
the next several years. Surplus capacity in the Free world
available to offset a supply cutback currently stands at more
than 10 million b/d. This, of course, assumes that none of the
countries possessing excess capacity is involved in the
disruption. Little more than 3 million b/d of surplus capacity
are outside the Persian Gulf. Over the next several years, the
market may be vulnerable only to a cutoff of Saudi oil production
or to the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf. The expected
reduction in commercial stocks this year will increase this
vulnerability. (s)

After the mid-1980s, the capacity cushion is likely to
shrink as OECD economic growth rebounds and productive capacity

erodes in some OPEC countries. Oil market vulnerability to
Page-14
SEC res Aron

smaller supply disruptions could greatly increase. We have
estimated that under a high demand scenario, available surplus
capacity would shrink to less than 2 million b/d by 1990, leaving

the market vulnerable to even small supply disruptions. (5)

The Price Break Scenario

A price break in the near term which stimulates consumption
and leads to cutbacks in-capacity development projects could
greatly accelerate the convergence between available capacity and
demand. We are already witnessing cases where major producers
are postponing or canceling capacity development plans, both
because lower than expected oil revenues have reduced available
investment funds and because lower demand levels make it doubtful
additional supplies could be,marketed. Such cutbacks could
significantly impair the ability of producing countries to
respond to a supply disruption later in the decade. Considerina
the importance of imported oil to US allies, there is no way the
United States could insulate itself fully from the economic

reverberations of a supply disruption. (S NF)

Gas Markets

The natural gas outlook is, for the most part, similar to
that for oil. Ample supplies are anticipated at least through
the mid-1980s in each of the three major markets--Western Europe,
Japan, and North America. Because of the high cost and

inflexibility of gas transportation, however, the capability of

the market to shift supplies from one region to another in
Page-15
SECRET/NOFORN

response to a disruption is much more limited, making consumers
more vulnerable to a supply cutof£. (c)

In Western Europe, the Netherlands will remain the largest
single supplier of natural gas and will be Europe's critical
source of surge capacity in the event of a disruption.
Substantial new supplies are expected to come from Algeria by
Means of the recently completed Transmediterranean pipeline to
Italy if pricing issues can be resolved. Additional deliveries
of Soviet gas are likely to begin between 1985 and 1987, either
through spare capacity in existing pipelines or the Siberian
pipeline when completed. Given the Soviets' need for additional
markets in Europe, it is likely that price competition will
prevail late into the 1980s. (S NF)

Rising gas requirements in Japan will have to be satisfied
by increasing LNG imports, largely from Indonesia, Abu Dhabi, and
-Malaysia, If all of the LNG projects now under way in countries
supplying Japan are completed on schedule, supplies to Japan
should begin to exceed demand around 1985. (C)

Gas supply disruptions appear to pose a major threat only to
Western Europe through the late 1980s. Because of its ability to
switch fuels, Japan probably could withstand a major yas cutofEé
if alternative oil supplies could be obtained. US gas imports
will remain a small share of supply. (C)

Growing. dependence on imported gas could leave Western
Europe dependent on Algeria, Libya, and the Soviet Union for
almost 40 percent of its gas needs by 1990. These three

suppliers could be providing as much as 70 percent of total
Page-16
SECRET NOFORN

Italian gas supplies, 50 percent of French requirements, and more
than 30 percent of West German needs. “Under these circumstances,
a gas supply disruption is potentially quite serious, especially
if it occurred in winter when European gas use peaks at more than
twice the summer level. Even given an unlikelihood that these

exporters woud act in concert, a cutoff by any one or more would
Provide the remaining suppliers with considerable leverage that

could be used to political or economic advantage. (S NF)