
Page-1
'
a
1°

5

 

sae vile ety tt be

 

 

 

VEO FEE gee

Testimony Before the Subcommittee on International Security
and Scientific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
House of Representatives

Mr. Chairman:

T am grateful for the opportunity to appear before this Committee
and to assist in its inquiry into a subject of great national {mportance.
The provision of intelligence required in the policy process is a task
of great difficulty and its complexities are not well understood. I
hope the Committee's findings will help us to do it better fn the future.

As Chairman of the National Intelligence Council, T am responsible
for the production of National Intelligence Estimates and other forms of
intelligence in support of the policy process at the National Security
Council Level. My remarks today will be primarily focused on the Estimates
as the most important formal product of the Intelligence Community. I
will address first the nature of Estimates; second, the process by which
they are produced; and third, how we are seeking to improve them.

Wational Estimates are produced by the DCI. They may be prepared
on request of a senior policy officer who is Concerned about the trend
of events in a particular situation; an example would be a paper on
current Soviet objectives vis-a-vis Afghanistan and Iran. Some are
scheduled on an annual basis and are tied directly to a pertodic policy

 

Process such as that of the budget; an example here would be our annual
Estimate on Soviet strategic programs. Lastly, others are done because
we in our staff can forsee a need for better understanding of a problem

frat
Page-2
that will probably call for policy consideration at a senfor level in
the next few years; some of our work on energy problems falls in this =
area. , .

One essential feature of a National Estimate {s that 1t draws on
all of the information and wisdom available to the US government, whether
from official sources or private Ones, on the subject at issue. A
second feature is that it goes beyond the Gescription of a situation to
project the course of events into the future. It does not predict, but
it outlines a range of possible futures and attempts to assess their
relative Probability. Obviously, the shorter the time span we project
the greater confidence we can give to our assessments. A third feature --
and a very important one -- 4s that our goal in producing Estimates is
not to achieve unanimimity. On many questions of great national impor-
tance there is a wide range of views. The Natfonal Estimate must not
Suppress dissenting views or water down the differences between them.
Rather it must identify those differences that are substantive and im-
portant and present them so that the policy officer can understand not
only what these views are but why they are held. A final feature fs that
an Estimate, however great the human effort and however extensive the
mass of data that have gone into it, must be clearly presented, con-
cisely written, and above a1} short enough so that the requester has
time to read it.

Turning to the production brocess, the key figure here fs the
Matfonal Intelligence Officer. The National Intelligence Council consists
of efght regular WIOs -- six with specific geographic Tespons {bilities
and two responsible respectively for strategic ‘forces and general purpose

-2-
Page-3
.
b:
i
[:

 

ha eee

eee ne

 

 

forces. In addition there will in time be NIOs-at-Large whose function

Iwill discuss later. ! =

Each NIO is the DCI's senior staff officer for his area. As such,
he 4s responsible for assisting the DCI in his participation fn the .
National Security Council, the Policy Review Committee, and the Special
Coordinating Committee. He {fs also responsible. for maintaining close
Maison with senior staff of the NSC and the Departments of State and
Defense in order to identify the questions arising in the policy process
on which intelligence can assist. €qually important, he is important
for seeing that intelligence production 4s in fact responsive. In
particular, he oversees the production of National Intelligence Estimates
within his field.

Once the need for an Estimate 1s recognized and the DCI has approved
its production, the NIO convenes representatives of the Intelligence
Community agencies to prepare terms of reference. He also invites policy
officers and, wherever possible, the requester. | The purpose of this is
to ensure that the terms of reference are in fact responsive to the
Tequirement. I should also note that while we very much want the policy
officer to help us define the problem, we believe that that should be
his last contact with the process until the paper fs completed. To
Preserve the independence and objectivity of our response, we must
maintain this separation.

The NIO then arranges for the Estimate to be drafted. He has the
entire Intelligence Community to draw on, and it fs standard practice
for him to go to the best man for the Job that he can find, regardless
Page-4
eae pf

 

 

 

 

 

of agency. In the case of elaborate papers, especially those on

military subjects, the NIO may form several interagency working groups =

to prepare parts of the paper. In any case, the drafters work under the

WI10's supervision rather than the supervision of their parent agency.

The agencies do not have to take responsibility for the draft; they

get a chance to make their views known at a later stage in the process. |

It fs normal practice for the NIO to employ a panel of outside
consultants to review the paper at various stages, of which the most
important {s at the point when an initial draft has been prepared.

Once the NIO and his superiors are satisfied with the draft and
have taken into account the comments of consultants, the draft is dis-
tributed to the various agencies for interagency coordination. As I
noted earlier, the purpose of the coordination process {is not to develop
a bland homogeneous paper in which all differences have been carefully
smoothed over or buried. There will be differences that will be resolved
in the course of argument. There will be others in which two sides are
Operating from different information. There will be still others of the
half-full or half-empty variety. Is it significant whether something is
sharply reduced or severely reduced? Disagreements like these can be
resolved. But there will also be real differences of interpretation, of \
substance, of judqment. The NIO must lead the Community through the
process in a way that eliminates the trivial differences and i]luminates
the important ones. To do this he must ensure that these alternate
interpretations are presented in parallel language, with the supporting
arguments arrayed so that the reader will understand what the fight is
Page-5
about and why it matters to him. I should emphasize that we are less
concerned with who holds what view than with what the view is; this =
means that differences among the analysts of a single agency are just as

 

{important as differences between agencies.
The final stage in the production of an estimate {s its presen-

tation to the National Foreign Intelligence Board. The DCI fssues Esti- ‘
mates with the advice of the Board. Each principal of the Board has the

right to dissent from the findings of the paper. In practice, this

usually means that the Board ratifies a paper that its representatives

have already worked out, {ncluding any expressions of difference that it 4

may contain. Nevertheless, the principals retain the right -- and often
exercise it -- to have their own dissenting views expressed in their own
way.

T have described the process as it normally proceeds, but we
retain the flexibility to prepare Estimates very rapidly by short-
cutting these steps. While the major Soviet strategic Estimate usually
takes six months or more to prepare, the shorter special Estimates
directly Tinked to current policy problems can be turned out in a few
days. This problem of speed is one that I will return to later.

Finally, I want to discuss some of the changes that we have
recently made fn the National Estimates machinery. To do this, a bit of
history is necessary. Since the early 1950's responsibility for the |
Production of Estimates lay with the Board of National Estimates and
with ite supporting Estimates Staff. In simplest terms, the staff was
"esponsibie for drafting Estimates and the Board, acting as a collegial
Page-6
body, reviewed them and advised the DCI on their fssuance. In 1973, Mr.
Colby, feeling that the Board had become too detached from the policy —=
Process and that the staff had become too detached from the analysts of
the Conmunity, eliminated both and established in their stead the NIOs,

as I have described them earlier. Because each NIO was also the Director's
Personal representative in the policy process, he could see to it that
there was a close linkage between that process and intelligence production.
Because he had to depend for his drafting assistance on the Community
agencies, they were brought back into the Estimates process.

Speaking very generally, the NIO system was more of a success {n
Providing intelligence support to the policymaker than it was in pro-
ducing National Estimates as such. NIOs, especially those on areas like
the Middle East, are extraordinarily busy and events in their areas are
fast-moving. This has meant that the Estimates machinery has often not
been able to move fast enough to produce the papers that are required
before they are overtaken by events. NIOs have instead found less
formal ways of making intelligence inputs. Moreover, there has been a
trend since the 1960's for intelligence to be woven into policy papers
rather than presented separate. Thus the number of National Estimates
Produced, outside of the military field, has fallen off, although I
would say that the input to the policymaker of estimative material (with
@ small *e") has improved sharply under the NIOs.

Another problem with the NIO system has been that of quality
control over Estimates. Whereas the old Board of National Estimates was

-6- : 7
Page-7
a collegium in which papers were subjected to critical review by a group
of experienced generalists, the NIOs have operated as individuals an- -=
Swerable only to the DCI. Not only are they busy, but the DCI is of
Course busier still. There has never been time enough to give papers :
the kind of review for relevance, organization, coverage, and just plain
wisdom that they deserve. Neither the process of interagency coordi-
nation nor the use of consultants is any substitute for this kind of
review. ;

When we formed the National Intelligence Counc? on January 3,
cur intent was to preserve the best features of the NIO system while
seeking to recapture those of its predecessor Board and Staff. 1 should
caution that we are only in the early stages of this venture and it is
far too early to “judge it. The requilar NIOs, their number reduced to
the present eight as described earlier, have become the Council, which
I chair. We are in the process of adding to their number four generalist
Nl0s-at-Large, who will not have the quasi-operational staff responsi-
bilities of their colleagues, and whose primary function will be to
provide that element of peer review that has been missing. We are
developing ways in which the Council can work in amore collegial manner
without detracting from the individual responsibilities that some of its
members will have for serving the DCI. In other words, the close linkage
to policy will continue. :

Another change will be the creation of a small staff of highly-
€ erienced analysts available to the NI0s for the quick preparation of
wide-ranging analytic papers in support of policy, and especfally for
Page-8
i
i
{
3
!
{

 

 

the drafting of National Estimates. This will, differ from the ‘earlier
Estimates Staff in being firmly rooted in the agencies of the Comnunity,—
with {ts personnel drawn from those agencies on rotation. One of the
disruptive features of the NIO system was the need for the NIO to nego-
tiate for a drafter whenever an Estimate was required. This slowed down
the process, complicated planning for the contributing agencies, and

lead to product not of uniformly high quality.’ By having a dedicated
Staff, we hope to reduce these problems without departing from the prin-
ciple that the best analyst, wherever he or she is located fn the Com-

munity, will be sought out for the job.

Finally, there will be some simplification of the Estimates
Process itself to make it less muscle-bound.

CIA was directed by the National Security Act of 1947 to “cor-
relate and evaluate intelligence relating to the national security."
National Estimates embody that function, which fs at least as important
today as it appeared in 1947. It 4s, however, much more difficult in
the more complex and fast-moving world of 1980.’ The changes I have out-
Vined are a response to this world. They will, I hope, enable ws to
deal more effectively with policy demands in the future.
