
Page-1
%

COPY=:NO.

/ ae
7 fon rue asstbrair bhGoron
pONFIDpefiaL i

24401

THE USSR PETROLEUM
INDUSTRY

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

  
      

ORE 24-49
Published 5 January 1950
Peete LASS.
OS Srancebyof
NEXT REVIEW DA’
AUTH HG 70% pr; 008514 _
DATE:
CONFIDENTIAL
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
2E -1007 :
B35 Hb 2 Wm spewrer
2- 35024
Page-2
TQP’SECRET

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

eaog

a

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

Nationa) Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board

TOP RET
Page-3
TOP CRET

THE USSR PETROLEUM INDUSTRY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION 1. BRIEF

1, STaTEMENT OF PROJECT . . . . : . . 5 : : .
2. SuMMaRY AND CONCLUSIONS . : . . ‘ ‘ . 7 : : :
. Crude Oil Production . ,
. Oil Field Equipment
. Refining Equipment
. Refined Products
. Aviation Gasoline
. Jet Fuel 7 -
. Synthetic Fuel Industry .
. Requirements and Consumption :
Distribution of Military POL Requirements Assuming war in 1949
. Military Supply Administration
. Conclusions: Requirements and Production
Soviet Capabilities To Exploit Middle East Oil
In. Relative Position of the Soviet Oil Industry

rot pom ho oo op

SECTION 2. STUDY

CrRuDE OIL PRODUCTION

Or Fretp EQuirpMENT :

PETROLEUM REFINING INDUSTRY

. Petroleum Refining Equipment .

. Refined Products

. Maximum Production Potential of Light Fractions

. Aviation Fuels.

. Synthetic Fuel Industry

4, REQUIREMENTS AND CONSUMPTION

a. Methods

b. Requirements and Consumption of Refined Products, 1940

c. Requirements and Consumption of Refined Products, 1949; Peace
d. Requirements and Consumption of Refined Products, 1949; War

yee

enerp

APPENDIXES

A. Petroleum Consumption and Requirements of Principal Soviet Consumers
B. Transportation
(1) Soviet Capabilities To Transport Military POL Requirements i in the Event of War
(2) Amount of POL in Transit . . .
C. Soviet Capabilities To Exploit Middle East ou

Page

DAANMhPRWOWNN HEHE ee
Page-4
TOP fount

Page
D. The Relative Position of the USSR Petroleum Tndustry . . . . . . 49
E. Soviet Crude Oil Refineries . . . . . : . . . 51
TABLES AND CHARTS
I. Refinery Capacity by Economic Regions . . . . . - . : : 9
Il. Available Refined Products, 1949 : : : 10
Wil. Distribution of Products with Maximum Feasible Production of Gasoline . . ll
IV. Straight Run Gasoline in Crude Oil . : . . 12
V. (a) Aviation Gasoline Production, USSR . [ +" : = 13
(b) Production of 75-85 Octane Aviation Gasoline, USSR" : . . . . 14
VI. British Percentage Allocation System . . : . . . . 18
VI. Re-distributed Allocations, 1940 : . . : . : . . . . 18
VIII. Requirements of Refined Products, 1940 . 7 . 7 . . . . 19
- IX. Requirements of Refined Products, 1949; Peace 7 . 7 . . : . 20
X. Military POL Requirements, 1949; Peace . . : : 7 . : 7 . 20
XI. 1949 Peace: Total Availability . : 23
XII. Percentage Distribution of Refined Products on ! Total Crude Requirements of 39. 3
Million Metric Tons : . 24
XIII. Tabulation of Refined Products Availability under 1949 War Conditions : . 24
XIV. Requirements of Refined Products, 1949; War . 7 : : . . : . 25
XV. 1949 War: Total Availability . 7 . 25
XVI. Summation of the Petroleum Situation of the USSR, 1949; Peace and War 7 . 25
y APPENDIX A
E Agriculture
I. USSR Tractor Park in 1949 . . . : . : . . 7 . 28
II. Horsepower of the 1949 Tractor Park . . . . 7 . . _ . 28
Transportation Rail
I. Percentile Relationship of Railroad Fuel Consumption . 7 . : 5 . 30
Transportation Motor
I. Postwar Production of Motor Vehicles . 32
USSR Motor Vehicle Inventory and Civilian Motor ‘Transport POL Requirements
I. USSR Mid-Year Inventory of Serviceable Motor Vehicles 7 33
II. USSR Mid-Year Inventory of Civilian Motor Vehicles . : . : : : 33
III. POL Requirements for Civilian Motor Vehicles : . . . . : . 33
Inland Waterways
I. Serviceability Mid-Year Inventory of Oil-Burning River Vessels. . 7 : 35
II. Horsepower Hours of Operation : : : : . : . . . : 35
III. POL Requirements of the River Fleet . . 7 . : . . 7 . 36

APPENDIX B

Chart I—Statement Showing Estimated Annual POL Requirements of Each Mili-
tary Consumer, the Amount Stockpiled and the Amount that Must Be
Transported : . Following page 45
Chart I1—Statement Showing Estimated Annual POL Requirements of Each Military
Consumer, the Source of aia by Economic Regions and the Transportation
Needed : : : 7 . Following page 45
Map I—USSR POL Requirements | in Event of War, 1949 7 : : . Following page 45
Page-5
oe ele

THE USSR PETROLEUM INDUSTRY

SECTION I.

1, Statement of Project.

The object of the present study is to evalu-
ate the petroleum industry of the USSR. The
following broad subjects are included: (1)
Crude Oil Production, (2) Refining Industry,
(3) Requirements and Consumption, and (4)
Strategic and Military Considerations,

2. Summary and Conclusions.

a. The progress of Soviet crude oil produc-
tion for 1946 through 1949 has been reported
in official yearly rates of percentage increases
over the previous year. In order to establish
an absolute figure to which these percentage
increases could be applied, use was made of
a Soviet publication which stated that during
the Plan, the average annual increase in oil
Production will be 3.2 million tons. This
fixed the 1945 production at 19.4 million tons.

When the official percentage increases are ap--

plied to the 1945 base from year to year, the
oil production for 1949 is a planned 32.8 million
metric tons.

bv. An important aspect of petroleum pro-
duction is the supply of oil field equipment.
By 1950, this is planned to be 2.5 times the
output in 1940, with a considerable increase
in the variety of items Manufactured. How-
ever, a shortage in fabricated steel and in
measuring and control instruments will hinder
the expansion of oil equipment production.
Soviet trade agreements with Czechoslovakia
and Sweden indicate that they are concen-

BRIEF

trating particularly on oil field Pipe and tub-
ing. US shipments of approximately sixty-
four million dollars worth of petroleum equip-
ment to the USSR during 1941-1944 was a
decisive factor in keeping the Soviet petroleum
industry in operation. US shipments from
1945-1948 of about forty-four million dollars
worth of equipment further aided the prog-
tess of the Soviet oi} industry. However, the
Western export restrictions instituted in the
latter half of 1948 would tend to limit ex-
ploration and delay expansion of refinery fa-
cilities, particularly for the production of high-
octane gasoline. .

ce. Soviet refining capacity now exceeds
crude oil output by an estimated minimum of
13 percent (with 40 Percent excess based on
all available reports of plant listings). A list
showing the location of Soviet refineries and
thermal cracking plants, together with their
respective capacities, is given in the Appen-
dix. A list of refineries of which there is some
evidence but not fully confirmed is also shown.
The condensed table below shows plant loca-
tion by economic region and total crude
throughput capacity (principal list) and
cracking capacity for each, with the total for
the USSR.
The principal equipment shortage for petro-
Jeum refining is in Specialized types for the
production of high-octane gasoline, such as
catalytic cracking plants, alkylation and poly-
merization units.

Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air
Force have concurred in this report. It contains information available to CIA as of 25

~~

October 1949.
Page-6
2 TOP poor

ECONOMIC REGION: USSR

(All capacity quoted in 1,000 MTY)

Plant Total Crude Cracking
Location Throughput Capacity Capacity
Northwest 425 10
South , 668 275
Southeast 7,460 2,666
‘Transcaucasus 17,615 2,517
Volga 1,379 3,703
Central Industrial 2,270 475
Urals 4,225 2,034
Western Siberia 3,234 2,156
Eastern Siberia 56 oa
Far East 1,000 135
Total 38,332 13,971

d. Based on indigenous crude oil production
of 32.8 million metric tons in 1949, the avail-
able refined products, with the exception of

high-octane combat aviation gasoline, will
practically meet requirements. The follow-
ing summary illustrates this:

(Millions of Metric Tons)

Requirements

Peace War

Gasoline 15 11.5
Kerosene 5.5 48
Diesel Oil 49 49
Lubricating Oil 19 2.0
Residual Fuel Oil 10.1 10.6
Totals 29.9 33.8

The shortages are based on indigenous produc-
tion and can be made up by imports and
synthetic production with a surplus for peace-
time consumption and a relatively small deficit
for war.

e. Because adequate specialized equipment,
such as catalytic cracking plants, alkylation
and polymerization units, is decidedly lacking,
production of high-octane combat aviation
gasoline, which is so necessary in an air age,
lags far behind requirements. From the avail-
able information, it appears that the USSR
can produce only 35-50 percent of its high
octane combat aviation gasoline for full oper-
ational requirements. In operations where
higher-octane gasoline is not required, 75-85

Availability Shortage
Peace War Peace War
TA 9.6 A 19
7 5.3 4.0 2 8
4.7 4.1 2 8
18 1.6 A 4
9.7 8.9 A LT
28.6 28.2 1.3 5.6

octane gasoline is available. However, ample
jet fuel production facilities are available along
with sufficient crude oil supplies to satisfy re-
quirements for air force operations, providing
sufficient and satisfactory jet-propelled air-
craft are available. Requirements for high-
octane aviation gasoline will be reduced to the
extent that jet-engined planes replace piston-
engined planes.

The estimated Soviet aviation fuel require-
ment for the first year of operations in war
is approximately 2.5 million metric tons of
high-octane combat aviation gasoline, of which
only approximately 1 million metric tons can
be produced. An additional estimated 1,500,-
000 metric tons of 75-85 octane gasoline, which

ono,
Page-7
ror flores 3

has been employed as aviation fuel in the
USSR can be made available. This latter
grade, however, is not suitable for combat
purposes but was generally employed for trans-
port and low-flying ground support and attack.

In the US, blending agents other than those
referred to above, such as benzene, toluene,
and cumene, which were found so necessary to
the US high octane production during World
War II, are in short supply in the USSR even
for the chemical and explosive industries, and
cannot be counted on to augment the supply
of high-octane gasoline.

Tetraethyl lead, perhaps the most impor-
tant component of high-octane gasoline which
improves its anti-knock value, is made at the
Oka and Kalinin plants in Dzerzhinsk, and
the Olginsky plant. in Moscow. No other
producing areas for this highly critical ma-
terial are known. Tetraethyl lead is a vital
material for the production of combat avia-
tion gasoline because of the small amounts
required to produce large increases in the
octane rating of the fuel and the efficiency
and maneuverability of the plane.

With regard to the whole problem of com-
bat aviation gasoline supply, it is most im-
portant that additional detailed information
be obtained in the future about the produc-
tion of tetraethyl lead and the construction
and operations of specialized equipment for
the production of catalytic cracking base
stock, and high octane components such as
polymer and alkylate, as well as aromatic
hydrocarbons such as benzene and toluene.

f. Ample jet fuel production facilities are
available together with sufficient crude oil sup-
plies to satisfy requirements for air force
operations, providing there are sufficient and
satisfactory jet-propelled aircraft. The avail-
ability of jet fuel is limited primarily by com-
Position of the crude oil. Jet fuel consists
generally of naphtha, kerosene, and light gas
oil, or a mixture of any of them. On the as-
sumption that the naphtha is included in the
motor gasoline, and that the jet fuel com-
Prises the total kerosene and light gas oil in
the crude, approximately 30 percent of the
crude, or about 10 million metric tons per
year, may be obtained from 32.8 million metric

tons of crude oil. If heavy naphtha is in-
cluded with this, comprising about 25 percent
of the gasoline, an additional 6 percent based
on the crude may be obtained, making a total
of 36 percent. Thus, with the sacrifice of other
products, a maximum production of approxi-
mately 12 million metric tons of jet fuel is
possible and this should be ample for their
needs. Widely scattered storage facilities
point to serious attention by the Soviet plan-
ners in this direction. Based on present plan-
ning, however, high-octane combat aviation
gasoline is in short supply and the amount
of jet fuel required is relatively small, indicat-
ing that the program for jet plane production
has only been partly developed.

g. Existing centers of synthetic fyel produc-
tion, namely, prewar experimental plants in
the Kuzbas and near Lake Baikal, have been
expanded by the additions of dismantled Ger-
man plants and the construction of new ones.
The center of activity is apparently localized
to areas which are distant from petroleum-
producing areas but which have suitable coal
deposits for use as raw material. In addition,
there are other plants outside the USSR, the
products of which would be available to them,
namely, at Most in Czechoslovakia and in the
Soviet Zone of Germany. Also, it is rumored
that both Albania and Yugoslavia have plans
for development of a synthetic oil industry.
The maximum production in 1944 of the six
plants in the Sovzone of Germany was over
2 million metric tons, which was reduced by
bomb damage and dismantling. Taking into
account the present Estonian production of
oil from shale and the capacity of the syn-
thetic fuel plants in the Soviet Union, it is
estimated that the USSR can produce approxi-
mately 1 million tons of synthetic liquid fuels
with which to supplement its current avail-
ability of POL. The total capacity of the
USSR and the satellites is more than double
this figure.

It is doubted whether synthetic fuel can be
used as combat aviation gasoline because of
the large amounts of blending agents and
tetraethyl lead necessary to improve it satis-
factorily to suit combat standards. Also, em-
ploying large quantities of lead in synthetic
gasoline would increase engine maintenance

ee
Page-8
4 TOP suger

problems. Since the Soviets have very limited
refining facilities for the production of cata-
lytic-cracked base stock and alkylates, a short-
age of these components for blending combat
aviation gasoline has probably resulted. This
shortage of blending agents for aviation gaso-
line may be the reason for the Soviet interest
in synthetic fuels when no better product is
available.

h. The Soviets will be relatively self-suffi-
cient in 1949 with regard to petroleum prod-
ucts, with the exception of high-octane combat
aviation gasoline. However, this has been
made possible only by strict control over the
supply of petroleum and refined products and
adherence to an allocation system which has
allowed for careful scheduling of available
supply of refined products to meet the essential
needs of principal consumers. If judged by
‘Western standards, present Soviet production
of refined products is insufficient to meet the
increasing requirements of their expanding
economy, but severe restrictions on civilian
and industrial economy allows a rough balance
between supply and minimum requirements.

The requirements of refined products for
the principal consumers in 1949, peace and
war, are shown below. The data for the in-
dividual consumers for peacetime use were
obtained by integration of the calculated con-
sumption data of each. These data, con-
sidered percentage-wise, check closely the
relative distribution or allocation system de-
rived by the British independently. Esti-
mates were made by experts in the various
fields of interest as to the quantity of petro-
leum products needed to operate the economy
at the current level of industrial activity. Use
was made of such critical indices as the growth
of the tractor park, ton-kilometers of freight
hauled, activity in the machine tool industry,
etc., as an indication of the general industrial
growth within the Soviet Union. It is noted
that the principal difference between the year
1940, on which the British allocation system
was based, and the consumption pattern for
1949 is the emphasis on gasoline and diesel
fuel rather than on kerosene, which shows a
natural development in the shift from a kero-
sene economy to a gasoline and diesel economy.
Allocations for Soviet industrial economy

under possible wartime conditions were de-
rived in the same manner. However, in the
latter case the maximum extent to which
supply might be curtailed without unduly
impairing the effectiveness of the industrial
economy to support the military machine in
war was balanced against the military re-
quirements as determined by a special study
made by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Requirements of Refined Products
by Principal Consumers
(Millions of Metric Tons)
1949 Peace 1949 War

Agriculture 6.0 5.9
Transportation Rail 3.1 3.0
Transportation Motor 44 3.4
Industry 6.7 6.0
Shipping 18 2
Home Use 3.1 15
Military 48 13.1

Total 29.9 33.8

i. Distribution of Military POL Require-
ments Assuming War in 1949.

The Soviet transportation system will have
the capability of distributing the total mili-
tary POL requirements amounting to over
12.5 * million metric tons, estimated as needed
for one year of military operations: 83 percent
or about 10.5 million metric tons will be trans-
ported during the year; about 1.6 million
metric tons will be stockpiled for the cam-
paigns, and the Black Sea Naval Forces’ needs,
somewhat under a million metric tons, will
not require transportation.

If the entire military requirement is moved
over the railroads, the total Soviet rail petro-
leum distribution capability would be severely
strained as there is a requirement of about
28,000 tank cars out of a total of 40,000; and
therefore, few tank cars would be available
for the movement of civilian and industrial
needs during the war. However, it is not
likely that tank cars will be used exclusively
for the movement of the military supplies, for
a considerable amount could be packaged in
drums, barrels, or cans, and shipped to des-

 

* Has been revised to 13.1 million metric tons.

anni
Page-9
tor fenes

tination in general-purpose freight cars.
Moreover, the internal ground and air Tequire-
ments of motor and aviation gasoline can be
moved by tank or general-purpose motor truck
when consuming centers are in close proxim-
ity to the refineries and the burden on the
railroads may be further eased to some extent
by the use of water transportation.

j. During World War II, the USSR had no
system of supply administration in the field.
Generally speaking, existing railway facilities
were the determining factor rather than ter-
rain or strategic conditions. Materiel was
sent to army depots located at various sta-

5

tions in the rear of the army zone anywhere
from 30-60 miles from the front line. In gen-
eral, while the system was of an elementary
character, it proved to be workable and eco-
nomical. Its essentials would Probably be
duplicated in a future war, modified, however,
by greater allotments of motor vehicles to
individual units.

k. The foregoing conclusions are generally
summarized in the following tables showing
the requirements, available indigenous supply,
deficits, imports, and synthetic production for
both peace and war, 1949.

1949 PEACE
7 Available
Require- , . Synthetic
ts Indigenous Deficits Imports Production Surplus
Supply
Gasoline 15 V1 4 10 6 1.2
Kerosene 5.5 5.3 2 3 2 3
Diesel Oil 49 4.7 2 3 aA 2
Luboil 19 18 A Al aA Jl
Fuel Oil 10.1 9.7 4 6 . 2
Totals 29.9 28.6 1.3 2.3 1.0 2.0
1949 WAR
. Available . :
Require- . itp Maximum Synthetic .
7 Indigenous Deficits : Deficit
ments Supply Imports Production
Gasoline 11.5 9.6 1.9 LS 6 -2 (Surplus)
Kerosene 48 4.0 8 5 2 a
Diesel Oil 49 4.1 38 4 A 3
Luboil 2.0 1.6 A A a 2
Fuel Oil 10.6 8.9 7 9 0 8
Totals 33.8 28.2 5.6 3.4 1.0 1.2

Exclusive of combat aviation gasoline, of
which there is a definite shortage, it will be
noted from the above that the requirements
for other products for both peace and war may
be substantially met. This may be accom-
plished because of adequacy and flexibility of
the thermal cracking plants in the production
of light products such as gasoline and kero-
sene for some uses. The indigenous refined
products must, however, be supplemented by
imports and synthetics. The over-all con-

clusion is that all requirements can be met
for peace or war with respect to all refined
petroleum products with the exception of com-
bat aviation gasoline.

1. One of the important phases of the
present project is the determination of the im-
pact of Middle East oil and the Soviet capa-
bilities to exploit the same. The most impor-
tant aspect of Middle East oil to the USSR is
the extremely large potential supply of crude
oil with an average annual production exceed-

a
Page-10
6 TOP glows

ing that of the USSR and with availability of

refining capacity of approximately 80 percent

of the USSR. Over and above these factors is
the presence of the Abadan refinery of the
Middle East, with an annual capacity of ap-
proximately 25 million metric tons of petro-
Jeum products and currently producing ap-
proximately one million metric tons of 100+
octane aviation gasoline. Aside from the large
supply of POL products, including jet fuel
and residual fuel oils, the acquisition of the
Middle East would make it possible for the
USSR almost to meet its requirements on a
current production basis of combat aviation
gasoline for the first year of war. However,
a significant limitation to any Soviet designs
in the Middle East is the inadequacy of trans-
portation facilities so that the question of pro-
duction and refining capacity becomes, in ef-
fect, secondary. It is estimated that the
USSR could transport only one million metric
tons per year from the Middle East. If land
transportation facilities were continuously and
exclusively employed in hauling oil, the theo-
retical capacity of rail and highway deliveries
from Iran to Iraq to Soviet border points and/
or Caspian Sea ports is 1,825,000 metric tons
per year, but the former figure is considered
the probable practical limit of transportation
capacity because of the poor condition of the
railroads. Even assuming the maximum theo-
retical carrying capacity of railroads and high-
ways, the existing transportation facilities
from the Middle East to the USSR would be
sufficient to move only 8 percent of the present
Persian Gulf refinery output. Also, the rail-
roads could be relatively easily knocked out
of commission by air bombardment because

of the many tunnels in the rail net. Any at-
tempt to build a pipeline in order to speed up
the flow of Middle East petroleum would be
an extremely formidable engineering problem
because of the mountainous and difficult ter-
rain.

As a result of the limited supply of combat
aviation gasoline in the Soviet Union, it would
appear that the Soviets would attempt either
to dismantle and transport the basic units for
the production of combat aviation gasoline
(namely, catalytic cracking, alkylation and
polymerization equipment), or in the alterna-
tive, to transport by air such critical products
as aviation gasoline.

In time of war this would be such a difficult
task as to make it wholly impractical.

m. The relative positions of the petroleum
industry in the United States and the Soviet
Union. can be judged largely by production.
Of the total petroleum produced in the world,
about 59 percent is produced or can be pro-
duced within the confines of the United States.
On the other hand, Soviet production consti-
tutes only 6.7 percent of the world’s total. In
terms of actual output, the petroleum produc-
tion of the United States in 1948 is about 290
million metric tons per year, whereas the So-
viet Union has only recently managed to re-
gain its 1940 level of 31 million metric tons
per year. While the over-all refining plant
of the United States is well balanced with re-
spect to all products, the USSR is deficient in
equipment to make combat aviation gasoline.
If the past performance of the Soviet oil in-
dustry is used as a basis for comparison, the
Soviets cannot be expected to make any spec-
tacular improvements in the near future.
Page-11
roy flfcner

SECTION Il.

1, Soviet Crude Oil Production.

Estimates for the base year 1945 showed
some divergence and after careful considera-
tion it was concluded that the most reliable
method for estimating the current production
of crude oil in the USSR was the use of certain
releases in the Soviet press. The primary
factors used were: (1) the petroleum goal
under the current Five-Year Plan; and (2)
announcements of progress in the attainment
of annual production quotas. The following
is a description of the method that was used
in estimating crude oil production from 1945
through 1949.

In the postwar period, beginning with the
year 1946, the progress of crude oil produc-
tion has been reported in terms of percentage
increases over the previous year. Thus far,
the official yearly rate of increase which has
prevailed since 1945 has been as follows:

a. Oil production in 1946 increased 12 per-
cent over 1945.*

b. Oil production in 1947 increased 19 per-
cent over 1946.7

e. Oil production in 1948 increased 13 per-
cent over 1947.°

d. BAIBAKOV, Minister of the Soviet oil in-
dustry, stated that the goal of the oil industry
for 1949 was to increase oil output 12.3 per-
cent over 1948 production.‘

In order to establish an absolute figure to
which the above percentage increases could
be applied, use was made of information con-
tained in Bakinskiy Rabotchiy, 29 May 1946.
This publication stated that during the fourth
Five-Year Plan, the average annual increase
in oil production will be 3.2 million tons, or

 

‘IZVESTIYA, 21 January 1947.
IZVESTIYA, 18 January 1948.
‘IZVESTIYA, 20 January 1949.
‘PRAVDA, 15 March 1949.

STUDY

a total of 16 million tons for the five years.
Since the 1950 goal is 35.4 million tons’ this
implies that the 1945 output is 19.4 million
metric tons. If the official percentage in-
creases are applied to this base figure for 1945,
the oil production for each succeeding year is
as follows:

Millions of
Year Metric Tons
1945 19.4
1946 21.7
1947 25.8
1948 29.2
1949 32.8

These estimates are further confirmed, sta-
tistically and independently, by reference to a
recent Soviet publication.’ Published by the
Soviet Embassy in Washington, D. C., this peri-
odical gave the development and advance-
ment of the petroleum industry in the USSR
which was characterized in the following
manner:

OIL. INCREASES OVER 1945, WHICH

EQUALS 100 PERCENT

Percentage Increases
Year Over 1945—100 percent
1946 112
1947 133
1948 151
1949 over 1948 112

If the year 1945 is assigned 19.4 million
metric tons derived by the first method, then
crude oil production by the above percentage
increases is as follows:

 

‘Russian text of the fourth Five-Year Plan,
PRAVDA, 21 March 1949.

* USSR Information Bulletin, Volume IX, No. 15,
12 August 1949, p. 466,
Page-12
8 noefabset

Percentage
Increases Production
Over 1945—100 (Millions of

Year percent Metric Tons)
1945 19.4
1946 112 217
1947 133 25.8
1948 151 29.2
1949 over 1948 112 32.7

Although the fourth Five-Year Plan en-
visaged an output of 35.4 million metric tons
of crude oil by the end of 1950, Soviet authori-
ties have announced that the goal is now to
be reached during the current twelve months.
This revision was probably made because of
the accelerated tempo of rehabilitation and
development during 1946 and 1947, and in
view of much greater need arising for the gen-
eral speed-up of economic expansion in the
USSR.

Recent criticisms of the oil industry by So-
viet leaders with regard to greater exertions,
however, has led some observers of the Soviet
oil industry to believe that the revised plan
cannot be accomplished and to doubt seriously
whether the Soviet oil industry has ever re-
gained its prewar level of output.

Also, it has been assumed by observers of
the Soviet economy that the current petro-
leum output figures do not indicate a rate of
progress wholly in line with requirements of
the supposed revised plan.

2. Oil Field Equipment.

Since the planned expansion of the petro-
leum industry depends on the availability of
oil field equipment, the USSR has placed heavy
emphasis on the rapid development of the So-
viet oil field equipment industry in order to
lessen Soviet dependence on foreign sources
of supply. By 1950, Soviet oil field equip-
ment production is planned to be 2.5 times
the output in 1940, with a considerable in-
crease in the variety of items manufactured.
An indication of Soviet requirements may be
found in the $10 million worth of equipment
shipped to the USSR from the US; about half
of which was drilling equipment, and the re-

 

‘For a more detailed treatment of the subject see
OIR Report No. 4689.3, 14 June 1948.

mainder cementing and prospecting equip-
ment. A shortage in fabricated steel and
measuring and control instruments will fur-
ther hinder the expansion of oil equipment
production.

The Soviets have improved their postwar
supply of oil field equipment by dismantling
oil field facilities in the satellites. The dif-
ficulties now encountered in the Rumanian
oil industry are attributable to the removal of
large and diversified types of oil equipment
from Rumanian oil fields. In Austria it has
been reported that the Soviets in 1945 re-
moved 80 percent of the oil well drilling and
field maintenance equipment.

Recent Soviet trade arrangements with
Czechoslovakia and Sweden indicate that the
Soviets are concentrating particularly on ob-
taining pipe and tubing for their oil fields.
Czechoslovakia is expected to deliver 50,000
tons of oil well tubing by 1952. Sweden is
scheduled to deliver 955 drills by the end of
1953, or an average of about 160 drills per
annum for a six-year period. A recent re-
port indicates that the Czechs have concluded
another trade agreement to deliver more oil
field equipment. This Czech-Soviet negotia-
tion, however, may have merely clarified the
amount that was to have been delivered under
the previous arrangement.

While the Soviet Union is expected to con-
tinue importing badly needed oil field equip-
ment, it will probably make a gesture of sup-
plying oil field equipment to Poland. In view
of the shortage of equipment in the Soviet
Union, it is doubtful if these shipments indi-
cate that the Soviets can adequately assist the
satellites in overcoming the critical shortage
of their petroleum equipment.

US shipments of approximately $64 million
worth of petroleum equipment to the USSR
during 1941-1944 was a decisive factor in
keeping the Soviet petroleum industry in oper-
ation. US shipments from 1945-1948 of some
$44 million worth of equipment aided the So-
viet oil industry to a point where the present
production has reached the 1941 level. Acon-
tinuation of such oil equipment shipments to
the USSR would aid the Soviets in production
and increase the rate of expansion.

eT
Page-13
royffacner 9

The present Western embargo on oil field
and refinery equipment shipments would not
drastically hamper present Soviet oil produc-
tion. Rather, this action on the part of the
West should be (1) instrumental in limiting
Soviet oil field exploration and exploitation;
(2) delay expansion of refinery facilities prin-
cipally for the production of high-octane gaso-
line; and (3) also delay any Soviet schemes
of stockpiling strategic quantities of high-
octane gasoline and lubricants.

3. Petroleum Refining Industry.

a. Petroleum Refining Equipment.

Soviet refining capacity now exceeds crude
oil output by an estimated minimum of 13 per-
cent (with 40 percent excess based on all avail-
able reports of plant listings), as shown in
Table I. However, the shortage of high-grade
refined products, particularly high-octane gas-
Oline, indicates that lack of specialized equip-
ment, such as catalytic cracking plants, alky-
lation and polymerization units, continues
to be the outstanding deficiency in the Soviet
petroleum industry. From available informa-
tion, it appears that the USSR can produce
only 35-50 percent of its high-octane combat
aviation gasoline requirements for minimum
air force operations. In operations where
higher-octane gasoline is not Tequired, 75-85
Octane gasoline is available. This deficiency
in refinery equipment, which retarded the pre-
war development of the petroleum industry,
was aggravated during the war by destruction
of plants producing refinery equipment and
by conversion of oil equipment plants to arma-
ment production.

Recent US restrictions on export of petro-
leum equipment and products to the USSR
have been effective in bringing about this
shortage. Another adverse factor is the So-
viet limitation in operational efficiency and
maintenance caused by a shortage of skilled
workers and proper repair facilities.

Construction of sufficient catalytic cracking
capacity is in the early stages. This process
was introduced only after the end of the war
with the shipment of Houdry units under
Lend-Lease. Four such units were ordered
but orders for two plants were cancelled at the
end of the war although the USSR did receive

some equipment for these cancelled units.
The general lack of technica! skill in the Sovi-
et petroleum industry will obviate full utiliza-
tion of the two completed units, as well as com-
pletion of the unfinished units. This short-
coming is evidenced by the Soviet overtures
for technical assistance from US companies
that took part in installing the plants: With-
holding shipments of this type of equipment
from the US has not only had the effect of
restricting Soviet production of high-octane
gasoline, but will probably accentuate the
present shortage for several years.

TABLE I
ECONOMIC REGIONS: USSR
(All capacity quoted in 1,000 MTY)

Total Crude
Plant Throughput Cracking
Location Capacity Capacity
Northwest 425 10
South 668 275
Southeast. 7,460 2,666
Transcaucasus 17,615 2,517
Volga 1,379 3,703
Central Industrial 2,270 475
Urals 4,225 2,034
Western Siberia 3,234 2,156
Eastern Siberia 56
Far East 1,000 135
38,332 13,971

0. Refined Products.
(1) Introduction to Table II.

In estimating the yield of refined products,
the chemical and physical characteristics of
the crude oil, relative to the quality and quan-
tity of each of the required products were
taken into account. The capabilities of the
over-all refining plant, as well as of its individ-
ual components, such as general refining and
cracking capacities, were also considered.
These factors, together with the crude oil pro-
duction, show the amount of each refined
product of a predetermined quality which will
be available. The actual weights of each
product were simply determined by taking a
proportionate amount of each based on the re-
quirement having the above factors in mind.
Page-14
10 TOP pooner

The volumes of each product were subse-
quently determined from the weights on the
pasis of known specific gravities, and the per-
centages of each calculated.

Table II shows the available refined prod-
ucts, both by weight and volume, based on the
estimated indigenous crude oil production of
32.8 million metric tons.

TABLE II
AVAILABLE REFINED PRODUCTS, 1949

~
rae

Das ° Vo

£8 esate s&§

eS 8 § 2 &S

gE Sees 8

&& £285 28

Gasoline 21.6 TA 25.1

Kerosene 16.1 5.3 17.1

Diesel Oil 14.3 47 . 13.7

Lubricating Oil 5.5 18 5.3

Residual Fuel Oil 29.5 9.7 25.8
Total Refined Ls
Products 28:6
Refining Loss mn

and Fuel 10.0 3.3 10.0

Other Products 3.0 9 3.0

100.0 32.8 100.0

(2) Discussion of Table II.

As explained above, the weights, volumes,
and percentages of each product were deter-
mined on a proportionate basis of require-
ments, taking into consideration the charac-
teristics of the crude oil as well as the neces-
sary quality of the refined products and the
capacity and capability of the over-all refining
plant to produce the same.

For example, the yield of gasoline, which is
the most important product, was determined
at 21.6 percent by weight or 25.0 percent by
volume of the crude oil. Since this is well
within the potential production based on the
above considerations, the actual breakdown to
produce it would be as follows: the average
yield of gasoline from the available cracking
stocks, based on the total cracking capacity,
taking into account all factors including time
eycle efficiency, is 45 percent. The maximum
statistical average yield (1944) for the United

- States which includes unused capacity was

36.5 percent; the used capacity is thus ap-
proximately 80 percent. Calculation from
these factors as applied to the USSR gives a
yield of 29.44 percent of cracked gasoline based
on the charging capacity of the over-all crack-
ing plant of 13 million metric tons. The
actual weight of cracked gasoline is thus 3.8
million metric tons, ie., 11.6 percent of the
available crude oil. The availability (based
on proportional requirement) is 7.1 million
metric tons; therefore, the straight run gaso-
line requirement is 3.3 million metric tons,
i.e., 10 percent of the crude oil available, thus
making a total of 21.6 percent by weight of
gasoline which is the figure cited above. It is
to be particularly noted that the yield of
cracked gasoline is well within the potential as
will be shown later, and the percentage of
straight-run gasoline similarly is much lower
than that present in the crude. It must be
borne in mind, however, that while more gaso-
line can be produced, the yield is definitely
limited in order to obtain a balanced produc-
tion of gasoline and the other required prod-
ucts as to quantity and quality.

The availability of the other products,
namely, kerosene, diesel oil, lubricating oils,
and residual fuel oil from the refining view-
point was also distributed proportionately on
the requirement and the amount of crude oil
available, having in mind the possible yields
of these products from crude oil as determined
by the amount available and its characteris-
tics. This applies especially to the production
of kerosene and lubricating oils. The limiting
factor in the yield of diesel oil is the minimum
quality which is acceptable on the one hand
and the necessary quality of the residual fuel
oil on the other, as these are tied together in
the refining process. Refining loss, fuel, and
other products, such as wax, asphalt, coke,
etc., are based on general practice, taking into
account the yields of the other products.

ce. Maximum Production Potential of Light
Fractions.

(1) Introduction to Table III.

In view of the importance of light fractions,
particularly gasoline, it has been considered
necessary to determine the maximum produc-
tion potential of light fractions, ie., gasoline

i
Page-15
tor gMcret 11

primarily and kerosene secondarily. This is
necessarily founded on the current crude oil
production of 32.8 million metric tons, and
the over-all cracking and refining plant
capacity.

In determining the potential yield of gaso-
line, careful consideration was given to the
characteristics and the quality of the average
crude as determined from the weighted prop-
erties of the individual crudes from which the
quantity of straight run gasoline and kero-
sene can be directly ascertained. The charac-
teristics of the charging stocks to the cracking
plant, and the yields of gasoline obtainable
therefrom in plant practice corrected to the
time cycle efficiency of the cracking plants,
which includes shut-down Periods, clean-outs,
Tepairs, etc., were taken into account. The
yields of gasoline from cracking were also bal-
anced against the minimum acceptable quali-
ties of the diesel oil and residual fuel oil, all
of which are intimately related.

TABLE III

DISTRIBUTION OF PRODUCTS WITH MAX-
IMUM FEASIBLE PRODUCTION OF

GASOLINE
Millions

Metric % By % By

Tons Weight Volume
Gasoline 10.8 33 38
Kerosene 3.0 9 9
Diesel Oil 3.3 10 9
Lubricating Oil 2.0 6 6
Residual Fuel Oil 9.2 28 24
Refinery Loss and Fuel 3.6 11 1
Other Products 9 3 3
Totals 32.6 100 100

(2) Discussion of Table III.

Since the potential yield of gasoline must be
directly derived from and is dependent upon
chemical and engineering factors, as well as
general refinery practice, it is considered de-
sirable to show the methods by which the re-
sults have been obtained. The premise of po-
tential yield is based on maximum gasoline
Production. This in turn depends on the
Sasoline content of the crude as well as the

cracking plant capacity, and the yields of gaso-
line obtainable therefrom. Taking into ac-
count all operating factors, the yields of light
Products will be governed by the gasoline and
kerosene content of the crude oil as well as
the gasoline from cracking. The yield of the
latter will depend on Tequirements and the
amount and minimum quality of other prod-
ucts such as diesel oil and residual fuel oil.
With a greater cracking capacity than 13 mil-
lion metric tons it would, of course, be Possible
to produce even more gasoline from the other
products, such as kerosene and diesel oil, and
even from the residual fuel oil, ie. with suf-
ficient cracking capacity all of the crude oil
would be converted into gasoline, gas, and
coke. Also somewhat more kerosene and
less gasoline could be produced if desired as
kerosene and the heavy fractions of straight
Tun gasoline are interchangeable within Te-
Stricted limits. However, this treatment
would result either in eliminating the prod-
ucts heavier than gasoline, or in destroying
the quality and the usability of products
other than gasoline. This approach there-
fore, would be highly uneconomical and im-
practicable. Other than for converting the
remaining kerosene and diesel oil into gaso-
line (if required), additional cracking capac-
ity could be profitably employed only if addi-
tional crude supplies were available. The
above remarks with regard to gasoline pro-
duction do not apply to combat aviation gaso-
line, because highly specialized equipment is
required for its manufacture.

(3) Estimation of Maximum Cracked Gas-
oline.

With regard to the determination of the
potential yield of light products comprising
cracked and straight run gasoline, the follow-
ing data methods were employed, all based on
commercial practice. The gasoline yield
from the heavy cracking stocks is estimated at
45-60 percent and that from light cracking
stocks, 55~70 percent—averaging 62.5 per-
cent. An estimate of the relative amounts
of heavy and light stocks is 65 percent and
35 percent respectively. The percentage of
cracked gasoline derived from heavy stocks
based on total cracking stocks is thus 34.2
percent and that derived from light stocks,

7 pms
Page-16
12 TOP §

based on total cracking stocks, is 22 percent,
making a total percentage yield of gasoline
from cracking based on both heavy and light
cracking stocks of 56.2 percent.

The over-all time cycle cracking efficiency
for US practice is 90 percent maximum al-
lowing for shutdown time, clean-outs, re-
pairs, and equipment replacement. Assum-
ing 80 percent maximum time-cycle cracking
efficiency for USSR practice, the over-all
average yield of gasoline from the average
cracking stock, corrected for time cycle ef-
ficiency, is thus 45 percent by volume.

The percentage yield of cracked gasoline
by weight was determined by taking into ac-
count the relative gravities of gasoline and
the charging stock, thus converting volume
percentage of 45 to weight percentage of 36.4.
The latter figure multiplied by 13 million
metric tons cracking capacity gives directly
the weight in million metric tons of cracked
gasoline, namely, 4.75, which taken against
the weight of the crude oil (32.8 million met-
ric tons) is 14.5 percent of cracked gasoline
or 19.0 percent by volume.

(4) Estimation of Potential Straight Run
Gasoline in Crude Oil.

The average percentage of straight run
gasoline was determined from analyses of ap-
proximately 50 samples of crude oil at var-
ious depths taken from the principal fields
of the USSR. The weighted average per-
centage of gasoline was calculated from these
analyses with the following results:

TABLE IV
STRAIGHT RUN GASOLINE IN CRUDE OIL

 

3

2
Be ee
ge. “gf S32
Areas S§ x<Bo SBS
eR 8S S58
os s8e Bas
3 FOS FR
BS Ses SSe
Se SSS 588
ee S82 aae
Caucasus 63% 22 13.85
Volga-Ural 22% 27 5.95
Remaining Areas 15% 12.5 1.87
100% 21.67

RET

A volume of 21 percent was therefore
adopted and this was converted to weight,
taking into consideration the relative gravi-
ties of the gasoline and crude oil which
showed 18.5 straight run gasoline by weight.
Therefore, the total gasoline by weight is 14.5
percent cracked gasoline plus 18.5 percent
straight run gasoline, or 33 percent. This
converted to a volume basis, shows 38 per-
cent, made up of 21 percent straight run
gasoline and 17 percent cracked gasoline.

The percentage of potential kerosene by
volume may be determined like the straight
run gasoline, ie, from the analysis of the
crude oil.

The percentage of lubricating oil shown is
based on the requirement; it has been pre-
viously determined that this was well within
the amount present, as determined by analy-
sis of the crude oil. The percentage of diesel
oil and residual fuel oil was found by sub-
tracting the other liquid products produced
from total refined products. The quantities
obtained are based on the maximum of each
of these products which can be produced
from the remaining crude oil of minimum ac-
ceptable quality. Thus, the potential quan-
tity of gasoline which can be made, especially
that obtained by cracking, must be balanced
not only against the crude oil or more directly
the cracking stocks available, but also the
permissible qualities of the diesel oil and/or
the residual fuel oil.

d. Aviation Fuels.

(1) Aviation Gasoline.

Because adequate equipment, such as cat-
alytic cracking plants, alkylation and poly-
merization units, is decidedly lacking, pro-
duction of this critical commodity, which is
so necessary in an air age, lags far behind
requirements. From available information,
it appears that the USSR can produce only
35-50 percent of its high-octane combat avia-
tion gasoline requirements for minimum
air force operations. However, ample jet fuel
production facilities are available along with
sufficient crude oil supplies to satisfy require-
ments for air force operations, providing there
are available sufficient and satisfactory jet-
propelled aircraft.

ee
Page-17
ror pene 13

Requirements for high-octane gasoline will
be reduced to the extent that jet-engined
planes replace piston-engined planes. Table
V indicates the present aviation gasoline pro-
duction within the USSR. In the event of war
during the calendar year 1949, the estimated
Soviet aviation fuel requirements for the first
year of operations are 2,516,310 metric tons of
high-octane combat aviation gasoline, and
646,758 metric tons of jet fuel.

In the United States, aviation gasoline gen-
erally refers to 95-100+- octane either for com-
bat or commercial transport uses, but in the
USSR gasoline of 75-85 octane was widely em-
ployed as aviation fuel. The production of
this latter grade will, therefore, be included,
although it is recognized that for combat pur-
poses, only 95-100+ octane should be con-
sidered.

In the United States, aviation gasoline is
made generally by blending a catalytic-
cracked base material with high octane com-
ponents, such as polymer and alkylate, and
with ethyl fluid. During the war, aromatic
hydrocarbons such as benzene, toluene, xylene,
and cumene, made largely by catalytic con-
version of petroleum hydrocarbons, were also
employed as blending agents. With regard to
quality, even the gasoline employed for trans-
port planes is superior to 95+ octane rating
and generally better than 100+. For combat
purposes, 100-130+ octane rating was em-
ployed.

In the USSR, however, where the Specialized
equipment for making 100+ octane combat
aviation gasoline, such as catalytic cracking,
polymerization, alkylation, etc., is Scarce, the
situation is quite different. Substantial quan-
tities of relatively low-grade aviation gasoline,
ie. 75-85 octane rating useful for transpor-
tation and ground support only, are employed,
although their use would not be considered in
the United States. To make the latter grade,
straight run gasoline with octane rating of
70-78 has been distilled from special crudes,
such as Grozny (Malgobek), Baku, and May-
kop oilfields. These are compounded on a
relatively small scale with higher octane com-
ponents such as pyrobenzene, alkylated aro-
matics, and some polymer and alkylate com-
ponents, etc., as well as on a much larger scale
with selected fractions of thermally cracked
gasoline and tetraethyl lead to produce the re-
quired 75-85 octane product. For the rela-
tively small quantity of 100+ octane gasoline
produced, the methods and components re-
ferred to above for the US are employed in a
limited manner.

High-octane blending agents, such as ben-
zene, toluene, and cumene, which were found
so necessary to the US high-octane production
during World War I, are in short supply in
the USSR even for the chemical and explosives
industries and cannot be counted on to aug-
ment the supply of high-octane gasoline.

TABLE V (a)
AVIATION GASOLINE PRODUCTION, USSR!
(Thousands of Metric Tons per Year)

Regions

Southeast 2,666
Transcaucasus 2,517
Volga 3,703
Central Industrial 475,
Urals ~ 2,034
Western Siberia 2,156
Far East 135

13,686

Cracking Capacity

High-Octane Production
(95-100+ Octane)

300 (Grozny)

250 (Saratov)

290 (Orsk: 135, Ufa: 155)
130 (Guriev)

970

‘Based on established plant installations capable of Producing high-octane combat aviation fuel of

pl.

95-1004 octane rating.
Page-18
14 TOP fevnr

TABLE V (b)
PRODUCTION OF 75-85 OCTANE AVIATION GASOLINE, USSR*
(Thousands of Metric Tons per Year)

% Distribution of Other Avgas Production Total Avgas Production

USSR Cracking
Regions Capacity (13,686)

Southeast 19
Transcaucasus 18
Volga 27
Central Industrial 4
Urals 15
Western Siberia 16
Far East 1

Too

(75-85 Octane) (75-100+ Octane)
291 591
275 275
413 663
061 061
230 520
245 375
015 015
1,530 2,500

‘Based on estimate of fuel produced by thermal cracking and selective fractionation of both cracked

and selected straight-run distillates,

pyrobenzol and probably polymer gasoline and alkylates. USAF con-

sumption estimates of average USSR front-line air force operations during World War II were also consid-
ered. While 75-85 octane gasoline is not suitable for use in air-combat operations, it might be employed,
in the absence of better quality fuel, for transport and low flying ground support and attack.

(2) Tetraethyl Lead.

Tetraethyl lead, perhaps the most impor-
tant component of high-octane gasoline to
improve its anti-knock rating, is made at the
Oka and Kalinin plants in Dzerzhinsk and the
Olginsky plants in Moscow. No other produc-
ing areas for this highly critical material are
known.

Various other materials, such as monochlor-
naphthalene, dibromoethane, and solvents
such as benzene and kerosene, as well as a
dye, are used in the production of ethyl fluid.
The amount of tetraethyl lead in the latter
should not be less than 49 percent and varies
generally between 62 percent and 63 percent.
When two cubic centimeters of ethyl fluid are
added to one kilogram of Baku gasoline with
an octane number of 69 (C.F.R. method), the
resulting product should have an octane num-
ber of not less than 85. The specific gravity of
the ethyl fluid varies from 1.5 to 1.75 (at
15°C).

Two typical US leaded fuels are shown be-
low as examples:

(1) Tetraethyl lead 63.3 %
Ethyl bromide 25.75
Ethyl chloride 8.73
Dye and other materials 2.23

(2) Tetraethyl lead 62.0%
Dibromoethane 26-28
Kerosene, dye, and other ma-

terials 8-10

The last mixture is classed as 1-T in the
USSR where a similar mixture is made, classed
as grade 1-T.S.

Tetraethyl lead is a vital material for the
production of combat aviation gasoline. This
is because of the relatively small amount re-
quired to produce a very large increase in the
octane rating (the amount employed is gen-
erally 3 to 6 cc’s per gallon, ie., about 1 to
1.75 parts per 1,000 volume) of the fuel; and
correspondingly, the efficiency and maneuver-
ability of the plane.

An important report on the production of *
the sodium-lead amalgum employed in the
manufacture of lead tetraethyl was submitted
by ECIA-RT-347-49 dated 21 March 1949.

This report shows the method of production
of the amalgam or alloy in sufficient detail to
permit calculation of the daily output which
was determined at 1,000 liters.

The fused salt installation is located at Ig-
umnovo (Gorki Oblast) which is probably a
suburb of Dzerzhinsk. The plant name is
Zavodstroy. The process is electrolytic, com-
Page-19
ror fffcrzz 15

prising 32 cells with 32 additional cells which
it is stated was to have been ready for opera-
tion in September 1947. The sodium-lead al-
loy is converted to lead tetraethyl at the Zavod
Yava plant (sometimes spelled Jarva) located
near the village of Rolon.

The details of the report, including dimen-
sions of the plant, output, temperatures, and
other operating conditions as well as the in-
dependent observations of others make it ap-
pear to be reliable.

From the data shown including the derived
production of 1,000 liters of sodium-lead alloy
per day the yield of lead tetraethyl and ethyl
fluid may be calculated; i.e., 1,000 liters of the
alloy is found to be equivalent to a volume of
2,350 liters lead tetraethyl per day. This can
be made up to 3,525 liters or 3,525,000 cc’s of
ethyl fluid. At the rate of 4 cc per gal. of
combat aviation gasoline this is sufficient for
the treatment of 875,000 gallons, which is 72
percent of the estimated daily production. At
the rate of 6 cc of ethyl fluid per gallon, 48
percent of the production can be treated.
With the operation of the additional 32 cells,
and assuming sufficient capacity for the con-
version of the sodium-lead alloy to lead tetra-
ethyl at the Oka and Kalinin plants at Dzer-
zhinsk, practically the entire present estimated
production of combat aviation gasoline may
be treated. This raises the question of the
source of supply of sodium-lead alloy at the
Olginsky plant in Moscow and whether addi-
tional lead tetraethyl over the estimated re-
quirement is produced; also whether it is used
in aviation gasoline of lower grade or in motor
gasoline.

The reported Soviet practice of employing
large quantities of lead in aviation gasoline
will lead to an increase of engine maintenance
problems. Calculations of the amount of
tetraethyl lead per gallon of fuel, based on the
Soviet ethyl fluid composition, gives an ap-
proximate tetraethyl lead content of 5.5 cc
per gallon of fuel. The acceptable US tetra-
ethyl lead content is 4.6 cc per gallon. Service
tests conducted in the United States have
shown that the use of such quantities of lead
will decrease spark plug life, increase crank-
case oil sludging, and increase maintenance
problems.

With regard to the whole problem of combat
aviation gasoline supply, it is most important
that detailed information be obtained about
the production of tetraethyl lead and the con-
struction and operation of specialized equip-
ment for the production of catalytic-cracked
base stock and high-octane components such
as polymer and alkylate.

(3) Jet Fuel.

Ample jet fuel production facilities are avail-
able along with sufficient crude oil supplies to
satisfy requirements for air force operations,
providing there are sufficient and satisfactory
jet-propelled aircraft. The availability of jet
fuel is limited primarily by composition of the
crude oil. It consists generally of naphtha,
kerosene, and light gas oil, or a mixture of any
of them. On the assumption that naphtha
is included in the motor gasoline and that jet
fuel comprises the total kerosene and light gas
oil in the crude, a maximum of 31 percent of
the crude, or about 10 million metric tons per
year, may be obtained from 32.8 million metric
tons of crude oil.

If heavy naphtha is included with this, com-
prising about 25 percent of the gasoline, an
additional 6 percent based on the crude may
be obtained, making a total of 37 percent.
Thus, with the sacrifice of other products, a
maximum production of approximately 12
million metric tons of jet fuel is possible and
this should be ample for their needs. Widely
scattered storage facilities point to serious at-
tention by the Soviet planners in this direc-
tion. Based on present planning, however,
high-octane combat aviation is in short supply
and the amount of jet fuel required is rela-
tively small, indicating that the program for
jet plane production has only been partly de-
veloped.

e. Synthetic Fuel Industry.

(1) USSR.

The Soviet Union is apparently further ad-
vanced on synthetic fuel development than
had been previously realized. According to
the Fourth Five-Year Plan, the production of
liquid fuel from coal and shale will reach 900,-
000 tons, of which 450,000 tons will come
from shale,’ and 450,000 tons will be produced
from coal.’ It is estimated that there are in
the Soviet Union 25 synthetic oil plants either
Page-20
16 TOP Moret

working or in the process of erection, with a
potential annual capacity of approximately
2,000,000 tons.‘ This potential includes dis-
mantled German plants which had a total
capacity of 1,689,000 tons per annum.’ It is
possible that when the Fourth Five-Year Plan
was drawn up, the wholesale dismantling of
synthetic oil plants in Germany had not then
been contemplated, and in consequence the
synthetic fuel plan may be revised in an up-
ward direction.

A high level source (who participated as a
scientist in the Soviet synthetic fuel program)
states that in 1944 the development was given
the status of an independent All-Union Minis-
try. Equipment and technical data captured
from the German synthetic fuel industry are
being fully utilized and leading German tech-
nicians are being exploited by the Soviet Gov-
ernment. However, these acquisitions have
by no means met all the requirements of the
Soviet synthetic fuel development. The So-
viet program is undoubtedly still handicapped
by a lack of modern scientific equipment, re-
pair facilities, and skilled technicians.

Both the hydrogenation and Fischer-
Tropsch processes of synthetic fuel produc-
tion are being developed equally. The main
effort has been devoted to developing these
two processes with a view to supplementing
the short supply of aviation gasoline and lub-
oils in the USSR in addition to other petro-
Jeum products. The hydrogenation process
will produce 70-75 octane gasoline, which can
be increased to high-octane gasoline by addi-
tions of iso-octanes and tetraethyl lead;
Fischer-Tropsch is designed to produce 50-70
octane gasoline, and the octane ratings can
be greatly increased by use of improved cat-
alysts. While the hydrogenation process at
present produces better gasoline, including
aviation gasoline, the Fischer-Tropsch process
is receiving attention because of its ability to
produce diesel and lubricating oils.

 

‘Law of the Fourth Five-Year Plan.

* Soviet News, 14 June 1946.

'From citation in J. I. B. 3/46, December 1947,
Voznesenskiy, Report on Fourth Five-Year Plan,
para. 22.

“J. 1. B. 3/77, 28 March 1949.

‘Ibid.

Since the Soviets have very limited refinery
facilities for the production of catalytic-
cracked base stock and alkylates, a shortage
of these components for blending agents has
resulted. This shortage of blending agents
for aviation gasoline may also be the reason
for the Soviet interest in synthetic fuels when
no better product is available.

Existing centers of synthetic fuel product,
mainly prewar experimental plants in the
Kuzbas and near Lake Baikal, have been ex-
panded by the addition of dismantled German
plants and the construction of new ones.
The center of activity is apparently localized
to areas which are distant from petroleum pro-
ducing areas but which have suitable coal de-
posits easily available for use as raw materials.
Therefore, the stimulus for the synthetic fuel
plant development around the Kuzbas and
Transbaikal is to make these regions self-suffi-
cient in fuels and lessen the load on the
limited transportation facilities.

Another supplementary source of petroleum
available to the Soviet Union is the shale oil
produced in Estonia and in the Leningrad
Oblast of the USSR. According to the Soviet
Estonian Prime Minister, A. Veimer, the pro-
duction of shale is to rise to 8.4 million tons
yearly by 1950 and the production of oil from
shale to 1.2 million tons... The Leningrad
Oblast is to develop a 1950 production capac-
ity of 3 million tons per annum of shale."

While nothing is known of the shale oil
refineries in the Leningrad Oblasts, the
present output of the shale oil refineries
in Estonia is approximately 1.0 to 1.5 million
tons of crude oil.’

Taking into account the present Estonian
production of oil from shale and the capacity
of the synthetic fuel plants in the Soviet

 

‘Law of the Fourth Five-Year Plan. Also, A.
Veimer, On Stalin’s New Five-Year Plan for the Re-
habilitation and Development of the National Econ-
omy, Talin, 1946, p. 14 (cited in ONI Rpt, Serial
#6-49, 10 Feb. 49, B-2, “Newsletter from Behind the
Iron Curtain,” compiled by the Baltic Review, Nos.
95 and 99). .

*FDB No. 15/49, The Law of the Five-Year Plan
for the Restoration and Development of the Na-
tional Economy of the USSR, 1946-1950, 28 Feb. 49.

*00-B-7535-49, 31 Aug. 49 (F-2).

00-B-3178-49, 27 Apr. 49 (F-2).

~i
Page-21
TOP  fercaas 17

Union, it is estimated that the USSR can pro-
dice approximately 1 million tons of synthetic
liquid fuels with which to supplement its cur-
rent availability of POL.

(2) Satellites.

There are only two areas of Eastern Europe
outside the USSR where synthetic petroleum
products are manufactured. . The synthetic
gasoline plant at Most in Czechoslovakia was
originally designed by the Germans during
World War II to produce one million tons of
gasoline a year by means of hydrogenation of
local coal. Estimates of present output range
from 10-50 percent of capacity. The most
recent information places it at 20-25 percent.

In the Soviet Zone of Germany there are
six important and several smaller synthetic
plants. In 1944, the six plants had an agere-
gate capacity of 2,270,000 metric tons. In
1947, after bomb damage and dismantling, the
total capacity was 1,000,000 metric tons. It
is estimated that only 60 percent of this capac-
ity is being utilized at this time. :

Of the five synthetic plants in Poland (four
in the Polish-administered zone of Germany)
none is in operation at present. All were
damaged during World War II and what was
left was for the most part dismantled. How-
ever, efforts are being made by the Polish Gov-
ernment to rebuild the hydrogenation plant at
Dwary near Oswiencine. It is believed this
refinery will not begin operating until 1950.
In addition, it has been rumored that both
Albania and Yugoslavia have plans for develop-
ment of a synthetic oil industry.

4. Requirements and Consumption.
a. Methods.

The Soviets will be relatively self-sufficient

in 1949 and their position is expected to im-
prove progressively as crude oil production in-
creases and the refining plants are modernized.
Thus far, strict control over the supply of
petroleum and refined products has prevented
shortages which would effectively impair the
Soviet plans for economic development. The
Soviet Union is continuing to adhere to an al-
location system which has allowed for careful
scheduling of available supply of refined prod-
ucts to meet the essential needs of principal
consumers within the Soviet economy.

It should be emphasized that the Soviet
Union is in a position to reduce forcibly its
civilian petroleum consumption in a manner
inconceivable for application in the United
States. If judged by Western standards, pres-
ent Soviet production of refined products is’
insufficient to meet the increasing require-
ments of its expanding economy; but severe
restrictions on civilian and industrial con-
sumption allow the Soviet Union to balance
approximately its supply and minimal re-
quirements. In this sense, the jmum re-
quirements have been met which are‘hot neces-
sarlly the amounts which the Soviet Govern-
ment would desire. .

Such rationing measures serve a dual pur-
Pose as prescribed by economic and military
considerations. From an economic point of
view, strict allocations are designed to meet
only the essential industrial needs and to
eliminate gradually marginal consumers.
From the military viewpoint, control of alloca-
tions enables the Soviets to have additional
supplies of refined products for their particu-
lar needs as well as to stockpile greater quan-
tities.

The various indices of industrial require-
ments derived in this report are based mainly
on the prewar relationship between domestic
consumption and the extent to which the
principal consumers of petroleum products
have been rehabilitated and expanded. The
indices established for 1940 and 1944, together
with the postwar conditions of the principal
consumers, were projected into 1949, as indica-
tive of the probable consumption pattern for
that year.

The conclusions in this section of the report
are intended to serve primarily as indices of
the trend of Soviet postwar petroleum con-
sumption. The methods and assumptions
used were largely reflected by the following
fundamental factors:

(1) prewar trends in petroleum production

and consumption of refined products;

(2) expected growth of the principal con-

sumers;

(3) postwar expansion of the petroleum in-

dustry; 7
(4) continued imports from satellites; and
(5) continued control over allocations.
Page-22
18 ror lant

Moreover, a careful review of all petroleum
studies by the State Department, Army, Navy,
Air Force, JIC, JCS, JIB (British), ASPB, SDS,
SID, etc., were analyzed. Pertinent material
from these reports was extracted and taken
into account in forming the basis of the Soviet
consumption pattern for the years 1940 and
1949.

In an effort to establish a basic structure
which would show the distribution of petro-
lJeum products among the principal consumers
of the Sqviet economy in 1940, particular em-
phasis was given to the British system of pro-
portional allocation. Here, the total petro-
leum products available to the Soviets in 1940
were categorically allocated according to the
main POL (petrol, oil, and lubricants, {.e., re-
fined products in general) consumers. Below
is the percentage allocation system as ex-
tracted from the British report, JIB, 3/44, TS:

TABLE VI
Percentage Allo-

Consumers cations in 1940
Agriculture 26
Industries 26.3
Railways 10.3
Commercial Vehicles 5.8
Shipping 3.0
Home Lighting & Heating 10.4
Military & Stocks 18.2

100.0

The 1940 computations were checked with all
previous estimates and reports which would
bear on the validity of the percentage alloca-
tions employed by the British. Therefore, this
breakup was included in the 1940 petroleum
consumption table since it was found that, by
and large, the percentage allocations could be
corroborated by most sources on Soviet POL
consumption requirements.

In order to have the principal consumers
conform to specific areas of interest, the table
was rearranged and somewhat modified. Use
was made of certain factors found in several
of the State Department and SDS documents
which avoid the cumbersome breakdown of in-
dividual users of automotive vehicles within
each main consumer category, ie., instead of
showing the use of such vehicles in industry,

@ section has been set up to include the entire
automotive park in the USSR under Transport
Motor. Also, military stocks were excluded
from the consumption and requirements for
Military. Thus, the following re-distributed
allocations have been used in this report:

TABLE VIL

Percentage Allo-

Consumers cations in 1940
Agriculture 23
Transportation Rail 12
Transportation Motor 18
Industry 23
Shipping : 6
Home Use : 10
Military 8

100

It should be noted that according to the
original British table, the. total consumption
of commercial vehicles and industries is 32.1
percent, whereas the total revised percentages
are assigned 40 percent to the two classes.
The over-all percentages were also somewhat
revised in view of more recent information.

b. Requirements and Consumption of Re-
fined Products, 1940.

In 1940, the USSR produced 31.0 million
metric tons of crude oil. Of this total, 26.3
million metric tons of refined products were
produced, 4.65 million tons going for refinery
loss and other products. This indigenous
Production was distributed according to the
above percentage allocations and translated
into the amounts of POL that would be avail-
able to each main consumer, e.g., agriculture
received 6.0 million metric tons of refined prod-
ucts in 1940, shipping, 1.6 million metric tons,
etc. (Table VIII).

Until the outbreak of the war, production
surplus over consumption and exports lends
credence to probable stockpiling in the USSR.
An EUCOM report, Gen. Proj. No. J-89, states
that the total stockpiles seem to have been
14-15 million tons before the war, of which
the Soviet armed forces alone are said to have
stored 7.5 million tons. Nevertheless, the ex-
tent of Soviet prewar stockpiling cannot be
definitely established and for purposes ofthis
report are not included in the 1940 total. Also,

ples
Page-23
rorféeoner 19

it can be assumed that POL were mainly de-
signed for consumption by the Soviet armed
forces.

c. Requirements and Consumption of Re
fined Products, 1949; Peace.

The estimates of petroleum consumption by
the various classes of consumers in peacetime
1949 was developed by considering the status
of petroleum industry, the distribution of re-
fined products, the effect of the war, and the
relative position of the Soviet economy in 1949,

gories and the percentage which this bears to
the total of refined Products; as well as total
requirements by the principal consumers.
Estimates were made and checked by
specialists in the various fields of interest as to
the quantity of petroleum Products needed to
operate the economy at the current level of
industrial activity. Use was made of such
critical indices as the gtowth of the tractor
park, ton-kilometers of freight hauled, activity
in the machine tool indust: 7, etc., as an indica-

TABLE VIII
REQUIREMENTS OF REFINED PRODUCTS, 1940
(Millions of Metric Tons)

z
° SS
g
§ € &
Agriculture 1.2* 4.1 2
Transportation Rail 7 01
Transportation Motor 4.3 7
Industry 3 3 2
Shipping 7 7 “4
Home Use = 17 7
Military 6 7 5
Total 6.4 6.1 2.0

 

"Includes 1.086 million metric tons of ligroine.
* Includes 700,000 metric tons for power stations.

As such, careful analysis was made as to the
minimum quantity of petroleum products that
Would be required to allow for the recovery
of various segments of the Soviet economy.
Tables IX and X, which are based on the
foregoing considerations, show the estimated
Tequirements of refined products in millions
of metric tons for mentioned Period. They
include the individual products, namely, gaso-
line, kerosene, diesel oil, lubricating oils, and
Tesidual fuel oil, for each of the principal con-
sumers, including Agriculture, ‘Transporta-
tion Rail, Transportation Motor, Industry,
Shipping and Home Use, as well as for Military.
Also shown are the totals of each product in
millions of metric tons for all industrial cate-

2 6 28
£ gs & ,ehe gf
3 & § ok g S& 88
5. 3 & gfe 2 gs
gé 8 &® sas oS
4 59 . 5.9 23
5 5 25 8.0 12
2 45 . 45 18
1025 35 6.0* 23
1 5 Ll 16 6
L7 10a 10
1 12 9 21 8
23° 168 9.0 258 100

tion of the general industrial growth within
the Soviet Union. These estimates were com-
bined with military requirements, production
and imports, and are shown in the tables.
Percentage allocations were calculated on the
basis of tonnage estimates,

The appendices show in great detail the
methods and calculations employed in estimat-
ing the POL requirements for the various cate-
gories of the industrial economy, and the
following are only a brief outline of these
methods:

(1) Agriculture,

In estimating the requirements for agricul-
ture, a total of 452,000 tractors in full-time
Page-24
20 ror flonns

TABLE Ix
REQUIREMENTS OF REFINED PRODUCTS, 1949; PEACE
(Millions of Metric Tons)

 

3 3
z a &  88¢ 8
§ § § 3 & 4g ghee #3
es & %F & § #, gike 35
S a 86 & #8 &8zR8 82
Agriculture 10 3.0 17 3 6.0 6.0 20
Transportation Rail i i A a 3.0° 3.1 10
Transportation Motor 4.0 2 2 4.4 44 15
Industry’ 3 10 1.0 2.7 4.0 6.7 23
Shipping‘ 7 - 3 Al 4 14 18 6
Home Use - 21 i 2.1 1.0 3.1 10
Military , 21 a LT 2 4.1 7 48 16
Total 15 5.5 49 19 19.8 10.1 29.9 100
*Includes diesel oil.
"Includes 1.1 million metric tons consumed by power stations.
*Soviet merchant fleet and inland waterways fleet:
a. Diesel oil: 298,686
b. Fuel oil : 1,419,879
c. Luboil 90,062
TABLE X
MILITARY POL REQUIREMENTS, 1949; PEACE
(Metric Tons)
c =
SS se 8 7 g 88
ge Ss 3 et 32 3
= g 88 s3 8 8 Bs g
xo So go a Es} 1 B
Army 947,700 169,250 107,050 1,224,000
MVD 119,700 11,400 131,100
PVD 62,200 5,900 68,100
Air Forces 412,000 188,000 80,000 33,000 34,000 747,000
Navy 427,230 1,555,424 35,962 653,552 2,672,168
412,000 1,744,830 80,000 1,757,674 194,312 653,552 4,842,368

the number of tractors in 1949 is less than in
1940, the total horsepower will be greater to
the extent that the POL requirements of all
kinds will increase from 5.9 million metric tons
in 1940 to 6.0 million metric tons in 1949.

(2) Transportation Rail.

Although several methods were available
for estimating the requirements for railroads,

it was concluded that the actual data avail-
able for 1940 showing the relative percentages
of various fuels employed in terms of thermal
units were sufficiently accurate for the present
purpose. This resulted in a total fuel con-
sumption of 3.0 million metric tons for the
railroads for that year. From all available in-
formation, the increased traffic is being largely

a
Page-25
ror facnzr 21

met by increased production of coal-burning
units although there is a small but steadily
growing use of diesel-electric units which ap-
pear to be replacing the old oil-burning steam
locomotives. Therefore, there appears to be
no appreciable change in the oil fuel require-
ments for the year 1949 although lubricants
and grease will increase.

(3) Transportation Motor.

With regard to the POL requirements for
the civilian motor industry, inventories of the
serviceable trucks, motor vehicles, etc., were
made and the POL utilization estimated for
1949. Estimated postwar production data
(745,000 vehicles, 670,000 trucks) were com-
bined with prewar estimates (110,000 service-
able prewar or lend-lease vehicles). Military
inventories of trucks were made independent-
ly. POL requirements were then estimated,
based on an average utilization of 20,000 miles
per vehicle per year for trucks, and 10,000 miles
per vehicle per year for passenger cars and a
weighted average fuel consumption of 7 miles
per gallon for gasoline trucks, 6.4 miles per
gallon for diesel trucks, 15 miles per gallon
for light passenger cars, and ten miles per gal-
lon for heavy passenger cars. Consumption of
lubricating oil and grease was computed on the
basis of 5 percent of the gasoline and diesel
oil requirements by weight.

(4) Merchant Shipping.

The current status of the sea-going mer-
chant fleet under Soviet registry comprises
about 522 vessels of 1,000 gross tons and over.
Of this total, 201 are oil-burning vessels, con-
sisting of 89 diesel-powered ships and 112
steamships powered by fuel oil.

In the Caspian Sea there are 119 vessels of
more than 1,000 gross tons, 92 of them tankers,
27 freighters. Of the tankers 21 are diesel-
powered and 71 use fuel oil. Of the freighters,
10 are diesel-powered and 17 use fue} oil.

In estimating fuel consumption actual
records were employed, or where not avail-
able, consumption rates were based on com-
parable tonnages. Consumption rates were
computed on basis of actual number of ships
in each gross tonnage class taking into ac-
count days at sea and in port.

(5) Inland Waterways.

In order to estimate POL requirements for
inland waterways, consideration is given to
horsepower inventory of the river fleet, fuel
consumption of the inventory by types, annual
number of hours of operation of all self-pro-
pelled, oil-burning vessels, and fuel consump-
tion of horsepower hours of operation.

It is estimated that the horsepower inven-
tories of the river fleet will be 850,000 at the
end of 1949, and 910,000 at the end of 1950.
Consideration was taken of the allocation of
horsepower inventories to coal- and to oil-
burning vessels. One British report states
that 75 percent of the vessels consume oil, and
reliable data are available on the steam and
diesel ratio of 2:1. Based on the assumption
of 200 days of operation annually for the
average river vessel, and on the utilization
time of 37.2 percent, the average number of
hours of operation of 1,786 for each self-pro-
pelled river boat is derived, and from this the
total horsepower hours of operation may be ob-
tained.

On the basis of known factors regarding
metric tons of diesel and fuel oil, and the
horsepower hours, the total requirements of
the river fleet for 1949 have been estimated at
approximately 266,000 metric tons. As for the
other requirements, references and detailed
data are shown in the Appendix.

(6) Industrial Requirements.

Requirements for the manufacturing and
mining industries, which have been combined
under the general heading of “Industrial Re-
quirements,” are largely estimated on the
basis of the 1937-1940 consumption trend, as
well as on the estimated trend of industrial
consumption of petroleum products by in-
dustry. Also, it has been noted that while the
requirements for industry have increased in
tonnage during this period, it has consistently
accounted for approximately 23 percent of the
total annual consumption by all of the major
consumer categories considered herein

It is believed logical to assume that industry
generally will keep step in petroleum consump-
tion with agriculture, transportation, and the
other categories in the civilian industrial econ-
omy in the same manner as has been the case
by actual records for 1937-1940.
Page-26
22 TOP offnst

(1) Home Use.

In estimating postwar consumption of kero-
sene for fuel oil for home use, it was assumed
that domestic burning of light oil was used
primarily by the urban population for heat-
ing purposes and that kerosene is used chiefly
by the rural population for lighting and cook-
ing purposes. The increased rate of use of
domestic burner oil over kerosene, as well as
increased rural electrification, and use of
natural gas for cooking, points toward in-
creased urbanization in the USSR. This, to-
gether with increased demands for kerosene
as jet fuel, or as a component thereof, would
indicate a decreasing use of kerosene. The in-
creasing tempo of “cold war” conditions would
also be felt in restrictions of consumption of
petroleum products for home use; and on this
basis, it has been assumed that the consump-
tion in 1949 would be no greater than that
allocated in 1940.

(8) Military Requirements.

Military requirements for refined petroleum
products for the year 1949 have been prepared
by the Department of the Navy, ONI, the War
Department General Staff, ID, and by the Air
Force and Air Intelligence. These data are in-
cluded in the report and are shown in detail
as part of the Appendix.

(9) Tables.

All the estimates based upon the above con-
sideration shown in detail in the Appendix
were combined with military requirements,
production and imports, and are shown in
Tables VI to VIII inclusive. Table V showing
estimates for 1940 is included for comparison.

Percentage allocations are calculated on the |

basis of tonnage estimates. In general, the
consumption pattern for 1949 so derived does
not differ much from the base year 1940. The
principal difference reflects recent Soviet em-
phasis on gas and Diesel fuel. Kerosene con-
stituted the bulk of Soviet production before
the war. This would indicate that a change
in the pattern of petroleum consumption in
the USSR is somewhat similar to changes
which occurred in the US some years ago,
namely, shifting from a kerosene economy to
a gasoline and Diesel oil economy.

d. Requirements and Consumption of Re-
fined Products, 1949; War.

Soviet economic activity in the event of war
will be significantly greater than under peace
conditions, especially in the output of arma-
ments such as tanks, ammunition, guns, and
planes, and in the basic industries of steel,
petroleum, coal, and non-ferrous metals. To
increase further their economic strength the
Soviets will undoubtedly curtail the civilian
economy to make possible the maximum uti-
lization of economic potential for war. Never-
theless, there probably will not be any drastic
change in the present consumption pattern
of petroleum products, except Home Use,-since
such a policy would seriously deteriorate the
Soviet position in food and manpower, indus-
try, and transportation, and thereby adversely
affect Soviet economic and war potential.

It is not expected that there will be any
serious curtailment in agricultural activity,
and thereby a cut-back in its present estimated
allocation. The industrial war output would
be affected at least to the extent that inade-
quate nourishment would prevent as large an
increase in production as might have been pos-
sible if there were ample food for all. It is
possible, however, for the agricultural con-
sumption of petroleum products in 1949 to
drop to the 1940 level without seriously im-
pairing the food supply of the USSR.

Transportation, in the past, the weakest
link in the Soviet economy, will have to cope
with additional pressure in supplying the front
with men and materials, of serving the in-
dustrial war economy and, of less importance,
maintaining a reduced economy.

If the USSR has full use of its railroad net-
work in a future war, it is believed that there
will be no substantial reduction of POL. There
may be some curtailment in the use of rail-
roads for civilian purposes, but the Soviets will
wish to utilize any such capacity for the in-
dustrial war effort. Unless war production is
reduced by enemy action or the “scorched-
earth” policy is once again applied by the
Soviets, the consumption of POL will not be
reduced by any significant amount. Military
requirements will, of course, be met at all costs.
It has been estimated that during World War
II, the consumption of refined products by the
Soviet Union was less in 1944 than in 1940.
However, it must be remembered that by 1944,

a
Page-27
TOP sows 23

the Soviets had lost territory in which a con-
siderable part of their railroad network was
located. In a breakdown of the percentages
of total fuel used by Transportation Rail in
1944, compared with 1940, Soviet Statistics
show that the percentage of oil to the total
was reduced by approximately 4 percent in
1944. The percentage of coal was also re-
duced, the slack being taken up by the uti-
lizing of wood as fuel.

It is possible that this performance in case
of war could be repeated in 1949 without too
great a loss in operating efficiency in certain
areas. If this is the case, it is possible that
POL consumption by Transportation Rail
might be reduced about 3 percent without ma-
terially affecting the efficiency of the Soviet
railroad system. Therefore, POL consumption
would be 3 million metric tons of refined prod-
ucts in 1949 (war).

It is believed that in a war the Soviets would
reduce the products consumption of Trans-
portation Motor some 20 Percent without
seriously affecting their ability to meet mini-
mum needs of industry. In fact, this amount
may be easily accounted for through requisi-
tion by the military of motor equipment,

It is not expected that industry would re-
ceive a POL cut-back in the event of war.
Rather, it would be more likely that industry

would undergo a shift of emphasis from a situ-
ation of peacetime conditions over to definite
wartime footing. It is believed, however, that
allocation of petroleum products to industry
could be dropped back to the 1940 level with-
out endangering the economy of the Soviet
Union.

In the event of war, home use would Te-
ceive the first and most drastic cut-back in the
allocation of petroleum Products, quite likely
to the extent of some 50 percent. Sucha dras-
tic cut would still leave the home use con-
sumer group with a supply double to that
available to the Soviets during World -War II.

The military consumer group would un-
doubtedly receive the highest priority in meet-
ing its POL requirements in the event of war.
To meet the increased requirements of petro-
Jeum products for military consumption, allo-
cations to the non-military segment of the
Soviet economy would receive a cut-back of
the amount ordinarily available under peace-
time conditions. Such an attempt was made
in this study in estimating how much POL
could be taken from the non-military con-
sumers and given to the military without
effectively impairing the Soviet industrial
economy.

Tables XII, XIII, and XV show the data
Telative to requirements and availability of

TABLE XI
1949 PEACE
. (Millions of Metric Tons)
Available
Indigenous Requirements Deficit 1; mports * Sy nthetic Surplus
Production
Supply
Gasoline U1 15 4 1.0 6 12
Kerosene 5.3 5.5 2 3 2 3
Diesel Oil 4.7 4.9 2 3 Al 2
Lubricating Oil 18 19 A A aA A
Residual Fuel Oil 9.7 10.1 4 6 2
28.6 29.9 13 2.3 1.0

* References:

N
.o

a. R-185-48, 29 March 1949, JANA Rumania—‘Petroleum Production in Rumania.”

 

b. St. Rpt. #11, 31 January 1949, Legation Vienna—“Austrian Oil Production.”
c. St. Rpt. #140, 27 September 1949, Legation Budapest—“Economic Report First Six Months 1948.”
d. St. Rpt. #155, 12 November 1947, Legation Budapest—“Hungary’s Oil Position.”

e. R-105-48, 20 March 1947, S-2 Berlin Command—

“POL Situation in Soviet Zone.”

f. St. Desp. 3237, 24 February 1949, Berlin—“Chemical Production in 1948 and Production Plan in Sov-

lo

zone Germany.”
Page-28
24 TOP for

POL on the assumption of war in 1949. Table million metric tons while in the case of war

XVI indicates the comparison between peace _the deficit is one million metric tons. This

and war requirements and availability in 1949. shows that the requirements of crude oil may
In the former case there is a surplus of two _be substantially met in any event.

TABLE XII

PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION
OF REFINED PRODUCTS ON TOTAL CRUDE
REQUIREMENTS OF 39.3 MILLION METRIC TONS?

a 2 » a
8 8 32 2 8
8 B g #2 $82 §s38 8&8
8 5 Sz 382 88 gs 2 §
So MS aSO ASO mR Nog a
Requirements (Millions
of Metric Tons) 11.5 48 49 2.0 10.6 33.8
Percentage .
Distribution on
Total Crude .
Requirements 29.3 12.2 12.5 5.0 27.0 14.0 100

* Wartime requirements of refined products is 33.8 MMT. In order to indicate the total amount of
crude oil required to produce the required 33.8 MMT of refined products, “Refinery Loss and Other Prod-
ucts” were taken to be 14 percent. Thus, 33.8 MMT represented 86 percent of the total crude requirements

of 39.3 MMT. In turn, the total crude requirement was divided into the refined products requirement to
establish the percentage distribution.

TABLE XIII

TABULATION OF REFINED PRODUCTS
AVAILABILITY UNDER 1949 WAR CONDITIONS

(Millions of Metric Tons)

2 sm 8
g § » 38 §.8 28
8 &€ #F, 8 #3 e288 &
3 32 6 °
6 & a6 § g& §8E &
Indigenous Availability * 9.6 4.0 4.1 16 8.9 4.6 32.8
(Crude)
War Imports * 15 5 4 1 9 3.4
Synthetics ' 6 2 a 1 a 1.0
TOTAL Available for War 117 4.7 4.6 18 9.8
Wartime Requirements 115 48 49 2.0 10.6
Deficit or Surplus +.2 —1 —3 —2 —8

Total Deficit of
Refined Products for War: 1.2 Million metric tons.

‘The percentage distribution of the preceding table was used. These percentages were placed against
32.8 million metric tons of crude oil available to the Soviets in 1949.
* CIA estimates.

* Products distribution according to German practice and data.

‘_ln..
Page-29
CRET

TOP

TABLE XIV
REQUIREMENTS OF REFINED PRODUCTS, 1949; WAR

 

(Millions of Metric Tons)

UWOHRNAMISIT gg ‘oo
abnjuaoieg ian

SagunsUod
Iodyoupid
fig squaw 5

-aunbay
IVLIOL

uO lang
lonpysay

3.0

3.4

6.0

9

15
100

2.9
31

TOd® 4 wean
TWioL ‘° 7

69

no
buypae re ee
“HQnT

HO e HAAN oO
tesa vi “|

4
15

auasosay &

14

auyospn 2 os. 2

1
34

Motor
Industry
Shipping

% of

TOTAL

Rail
Transportation

Transportation
Home Use
Military

Agriculture

TABLE XV
1949 WAR
(Millions of Metric Tons)

woYaq

uouonposd
oyayquig

8991118705
most
a1qnyoay
Sploduy
wnupcoy

Hoyed
snou
-abrpuy

SquauL
-aunbay

fyddng
snouabipuy
a1qniway

(surplus)

Vey cy oe oy
In

erat tz aye
i

Bet to ale
w ic}

AQg won
a nile

aa
mv wt
a

2.0

bac
Ow i

16
8.9
2

Oil
Fuel Oil

Residual

Lubricating

Gasoline
Kerosene
Diesel Oil

TABLE XVI

SUMMATION OF THE PETROLEUM SI’

‘TUATION

, 1949; PEACE AND WAR

OF THE USSR,

(Millions of Metric Tons)

=

33

a3

ae

Bs

HoYed Won

snding % 4
uoyonpoig

tang 2S
onayuis
(404,

® aovag) 2 S
sqtoduy

FOVET on

snouabipuy 4s

(sjonpoig
Pauyoy) om
Aamannway BR

Ssnouabipuy

(sjonpoig
peuyay) 2
Squaw a 8

-aunbay

Snouabipuy

Peace
War
Page-30
26

ror flener

APPENDIXES
PETROLEUM CONSUMPTION AND REQUIREMENTS OF PRINCIPAL SOVIET CON-
SUMERS :
TRANSPORTATION

1. Distribution of Military POL Consumption Assuming War in 1949
2. Military Supply Administration

SOVIET CAPABILITIES TO EXPLOIT MIDDLE EAST OIL
THE RELATIVE POSITION OF THE USSR PETROLEUM INDUSTRY

SOVIET CRUDE OIL REFINERIES
1. List of Crude Oil Refineries in the USSR (confirmed)
2. Secondary Refinery List (not fully confirmed)

CRET

)
Page-31
TOP

CRET

APPENDIX A

PETROLEUM CONSUMPTION AND REQUIREMENTS OF PRINCIPAL
SOVIET CONSUMERS

1... Agriculture.

a. USSR Tractor Park.

Tractor numbers in the USSR in 1940 were
523,000." It is estimated that 5,500 tractors
were built in 1941,’ giving the Soviets 528,500
tractors at the time the Nazis invaded the
USSR. r

It has been reported that 137,000 tractors
were lost to the enemy,’ leaving 391,500 trac-
tors in the hands of the Soviets. It is as-
sumed that 30 percent of the remainder dis-
appeared from use by 1949 because of com-
plete wearing out and cannabalization for
spare parts. This would leave a total of 274,-
000 tractors out of the prewar park operating
in 1949.

It is estimated that the USSR seized as war
booty, requisitioned, or received as reparations
25,000 tractors by the end of 1948.

In addition, 10,000 tractors were received
under Lend-Lease and UNRRA.'

Domestic production of tractors was re-
sumed in 1945 with a total of 8,700 manufac-
tured in that year; * 14,000 in 1946; * 29,300 in
1947; * 60,000 in 1948; * and a projected total of
78,000 in 1949. However, not all of the 1949
produced tractors will be used in field opera-

 

* Sotsialisticheskoe Selskoe Khozyaistvo, 1947, No.
8, p. 11.

“OIR Report No. 4704, July 21, 1948, entitled
“Draft Power in Soviet Agriculture,” Department of
State.

*Voennaya Ekonomika SSSR v Pertod Otechest-
vennot Voyni, by N. Voznesensky Moskva, 1947, p.
160.

“See Twenty-First Report to Congress on Lend-
Lease Operations, for the Period Ended September
30, 1945 and also United States Exports of Domestic
and Foreign Merchandise, Report No. FT 410, Sec-
tion H, Group 7, 1946 and 1947, Bureau of the
Census, Department of Commerce.

“CIA estimate.

tions during the entire year and will not con-
sume an annual requirement of petroleum
products. It is estimated that the petroleum
used by tractors produced in 1949 will be
equivalent to the total annual consumption by
31,000 tractors. Thus, a total of 452,000 trac-
tors in full-time use in 1949 is indicated.

b. Horsepower of Tractor Park.

The total horsepower of the 523,000 tractors
in 1940 was 10,260,000, or an average of 19.6
horsepower per tractor. The Five Year Plan
calls for a total tractor production of 325,000
units during 1946-1950, with a total power
amounting to 10.8 million horsepower.

Despite the fact that the number of tractors
in 1949 is less than in 1940, the total horse-
power will be above prewar, or nearly 11.0 mil-
lion horsepower in 1949 as compared with
nearly 10.3 million horsepower in 1940. The
USSR tractor industry is gradually increasing
the average horsepower per tractor so that the
planned 1946-1950 production of 325,000 trac-
tors will have an average of 33 horsepower per
tractor.

c. Petroleum Consumption by Tractors.

In 1940, 523,000 tractors with 10,260,000
horsepower consumed 5.9 million metric tons
of petroleum products, or 0.575 ton per horse-
power.’

Assuming that 80 percent of the total horse-
power of the postwar produced tractors was
in diesel-consuming tractors, then the follow-

 

*OIR Report No. 4704, July 21, 1948, entitled “Draft
Power in Soviet Agriculture,” Department of State.

*Fuel consumption and breakdown for 1937 and
1940 is estimated in R & A No. 2516, Domestic Con-
sumption of Petroleum Products in the USSR, 1945-
1952, and cites as references: Wassilief, Soviet Oil
Industry in 1938, in 1939 and in the First Six Months
of 1940; COI (OSS) Report No. 58, “The Effect of
Territorial Losses on Russia’s Petroleum Position,”
20 May 1942 pp. 27-29.

27
Page-32
28 TOP porwr

ing breakdown of horsepower in 1949, by
diesel-consuming and other fuel consuming
tractors, is indicated:

8.8, $82 &.
SSEE ase 88 :
5 SS52 SEasse ges
8 E828 ESSSse BSs
» rsse RWesoag RR
1949 3,546,000 1,417,000 10,963,000

Very little diesel fuel in proportion to other
fuels was consumed by Soviet tractors in pre-
war days. It is safe to assume that the 0.575
metric tons of petroleum consumed per horse-
power by the Soviet tractor would also apply
to the 20 percent of postwar production in
non-diesel tractors as well as in tractors left
over from prewar, tractors obtained by requi-
sitions, reparations, and from UNRRA and
Lend-Lease.

Both American and Soviet experience has
shown that the diesel fuel requirements per
horsepower hour on full or near full load is
about five-sixths that of kerosene (the com-
mon tractor fuel in prewar USSR). This
would indicate that the factor 0.575 metric
tons of petroleum should be reduced one-sixth
or 17 percent in order to arrive at a weight
of diesel fuel required per horsepower of diesel
tractors. This means 0.477 metric tons of
diesel fuel per horsepower.

The following petroleum consumption for
1949 is thus indicated:

1949
Horsepower of Diesel Consuming
Tractors (HP) 3,546,000
Diesel Consumption per Horse-
power (metric tons) 0.477
Total Diesel Fuel Required (met-
ric tons) 1,691,000
Horsepower of Tractors Consum-
ing Other Fuels (HP) 1,417,000
Consumption of Other Petroleum
per Horsepower (metric tons) 0.575
Total non-Diesel Petroleum Re-
quired (metric tons) 4,265,000

 

‘See “O Tipakh Traktorov v Selskom Khozyaistoe
SSSR,” by S. P. Matskevich in Sotsialisticheskoe Sel-
skoe Khozyaistvo, No. 12, December 1943.

Total Horsepower of all Tractors

(HP) 10,963,000
Total Petroleum, All Kinds, Re-
quired (metric tons) 5,956,000

The following breakdown of total petroleum
requirements for 1949 is estimated:

Prewar* 1949
(In Millions of Metric Tons)
Gasoline 12 1.0
Kerosene 41 3.0
Diesel Oil 0.2 17
Lubricating Oil 04 0.3
Total x) 60
TABLE I

USSR TRACTOR PARK IN 1949
(in units of tractors)

 

1949*

Tractors from prewar production 274,000
Tractors obtained by requisitions,

reparations, etc. 25,000
Tractors obtained from UNRRA and

Lend-Lease 10,000
Tractors produced in USSR 1945 to

1948, inclusive 112,000
Total tractors produced in 1949 aa
Full-use equivalent of tractors pro-

duced in specified year 31,000

Total 452,000

TABLE II
HORSEPOWER OF THE 1949
TRACTOR PARK

S. 3 x 8 8
| SD
se si UE
ee B52 s&
3
2G ek ae
Tractors from
prewar pro-
duction 274,000 20 5,480,000

 

‘Fuel consumption and breakdown for 1937 and
1940 is estimated in R&A No. 2516, Domestic Con-
sumption of Petroleum Products in the USSR, 1945-
1952, and cites as references: Wassilief, Soviet oil
Industry in 1938, in 1939, and in the First Six
Months of 1940: COI (OSS) Report No. 58, “The Ef-
fect of Territorial Losses on Russia’s Petroleum
Position,” 20 May 1942, pp. 27-29.

*See text for explanation of figures.

*From Table I.

“CIA estimate. ~

—
Page-33
rorffgonzt 29

Tractors ob-
tained by
requisitions,
reparations,
etc. 25,000 30

Tractors ob-
tained from
UNRRA and
Lend-Lease

Tractors pro-
duced in
USSR
1945-1948,
inclusive

Full-use equiv-
alent of trac-
tors produced
in specified
year

750,000

10,000 30 300,000

112,000 31 3,472,000

31,000 31

24.3 *

961,000

10,963,000

 

Total 452,000

2. Transportation Rail.

No current Soviet data are available on the
Soviet railroad requirements for POL. There-
fore, these data can only be obtained by means
of estimates. There are several methods that
might be used in arriving at estimates in rail-
road POL requirements.

" The first way that is suggested is using a
firm figure of POL consumption for a prewar
year and then increasing this figure in 1949
by the estimated increase in ton-kilometers of
freight in that year over the base year. This
method is not considered desirable for a num-
ber of reasons: (1) a close relationship be-
tween ton miles and POL consumption cannot
be observed in US transportation statistics;
(2) the method presupposes that as ton-
kilometers and utilization of equipment in-
crease, the use of oil-burning locomotives will
be increased proportionately; and (3) as loco-
motives are added to inventory, the same rela-
tionship between coal and oil-burning loco-
motives will be maintained. The method has
merit only in an estimate of the consumption
of lubricating oil and grease which represents

 

* Average horsepower of all tractors.

only a small percentage of the total consump-
tion of POL.

A second method that might be used is ap-
plying experienced POL utilization factors
such as tons of POL per ton-kilometer and
Passenger kilometer of traffic. Such experi-
ence factors are not available for the USSR,
and although they are available for the United
States, the US factors cannot be applied to
the USSR, because knowledge of the utiliza-
tion of oil-burning equipment (ie., the num-
ber of ton-kilometers and passenger kilometers
produced by Diesel and oil-burning locomo-
tives as compared with coal-burning locomo-
tives) is not available for the Soviet Union.

The third method, while admittedly one of
expediency, appears to be the only one that
can be used on the basis of information cur-
rently available on Soviet railroads. This
method is based on evidence that the use of
oil for motive power fuel has not and is not
being emphasized on the Soviet railroads. In
1938, a Soviet source stated that up to 90 per-
cent of the total fuel consumed on the rail-
toads was hard mineral fuel.' The author
goes on to warn that, in the future, the ex-
penditure of mazut fuel will be cut sharply
and more and more will the use of coal in-
crease. This is, it is stated, in full compliance
with the instructions of the party and of the
administration on the conversion to local'types
of fuel." Moreover, in 1945, it was announced
that the use of local fuels and products is a
feature of Soviet railroad operations.’

Depending upon the availability of local sup-
plies, the railroads of the Soviet Union can
burn coal, oil, and wood. The areas in which
it is expected that most oil fuel is consumed
are the Caucasus and Central Asia. Both coal
and oil are used for fuel in the steam locomo-
tives operated on the Caucasus railroads.
Coal is principally used in the north and fuel
oil in the Transcaucasus. Diesels have also
been reported in the Caucasus, and are used

 

‘Material Supply, A. V. Naumov, Volume II, Mos-
cow, 1938, page 238.

"Op. Cit.

*Stakhanovite Methods for the Economizing of

Fuel, L. G. Murzin and I. P. Feldman, Moscow, 1945,
page 3.

ei
Page-34
30

because of the difficulties of the water supply
and the poor quality of immediately available
coal. Possibly from Prokhladnaya south and
east in the Turkmen, Uzbek, Kazakh, Tad-
zhik, and Kirgiz republics south of the 48th
parallel are the other areas in which oil-burn-
ing rail traction is employed.

“ In conformity with the Soviet practice of
holding to a minimum the quantity of petro-
leum consumed on the railroads, it seems that
the modern type of locomotive, notably the
JS passenger locomotive and the FD freight
locomotive have not been designed as oil burn-
ers, but possibly the Consolidation lend-lease
freight locomotive, the L 4-6-2, passenger loco-
motive, E 0-10-0 freight, the new Pobeda, and
the O and Y 0-80 locomotive burn oil when
used in the area indicated above.’

Information on the total number of kilo-
meters of track on which oil-burning locomo-
tives are used is conflicting. However, it ap-
pears that 7,000 kilometers may have been de-
voted to oil traction in 1940. This would be
‘7 percent of the 105,000 kilometers of through
route in operation in that year. About 6 per-
cent of the 118,000 kilometers of railroad lines
planned for 1950 may be used by oil-burning
locomotives. Nevertheless, the number of kil-
ometers of track respectively devoted to Diesel
and to fuel oil traction is not known, and the
amount of traffic planned or carried over oil-
burning routes is not available.

Under the circumstances the most desirable
method of determining the quantity of oil
burned by the railroads consists of relating the
percentile consumption of petroleum products
to the percentile consumption of coal and
wood. The following table shows the percent-
age relationship in the consumption of the
various types of fuel:”

 

* JANIS, 41, Section VII, page 8 and page 16; Table
VII-7, page 17; Table VII-8. Handbook on USSR
Railways Volume III, page 5 and ff. USFA-BWR #52
of 14 Nov. 47.

* Embassy Moscow cable, 31 July 1944; Handbook
on USSR Railroads. In JIB 3/73 and 3/83, a figure
of 93 percent for coal, 6 percent for oil, and 1 per-
cent for wood consumption “before the war” is used.
This is related to 1940, but may refer to some other
Prewar year or even part of a year. Further “93
percent coal” is an ambiguous term since the type
of coal is not known. Separating out the lignite

ror gflenes

TABLE I

PERCENTILE RELATIONSHIP OF
RAILROAD FUEL CONSUMPTION

Year
1913 1933 1940 1943
Fuel % % % %
Coal 846 645
Lignite ia nf 63 172
oil 3824818
Wood 1% 2 10 5

The percentages above total 100 percent for
each year described and refer to the total ca-
loric fuel consumption on the railroads. In
1940, 93.5 percent of the total coal consumed
by all forms of transportation was used by the
railroads.’ The total consumed by transporta-
tion was 49 million tons.‘ Therefore, 45.8
million metric tons of coal were consumed by
railroads in 1940, and this amounted to 90.9
percent of the total amount of fuel consumed
by the railroads. Of this amount, 45.8 million
metric tons of coal, 42.6 million metric tons
are hard coal types and 3.2 million metric tons
are lignite. Converting the lignite into hard
coal, the total hard coal would amount to 44
million metric tons.’ Since 90.9 percent of the
total fuel consumed amounted to 44 million
metric tons of hard coal, we derive 48.4 million
metric tons as the total (100 percent) fuel con-
sumption in 1940 in terms of hard coal. 8.1
percent of this amounts to 3.92 million metric
tons of oil expressed in hard coal units. Using
1.3 as a conversion factor from hard coal to
oil, a total oil consumption on the railroads
of 3.01 million metric tons is obtained.

In 1949, and so far as can be observed for
1950, the increased traffic production is largely
being effected by the increased production of
coal-burning locomotives although there is a
small but growing production of diesel-electric
units. The diesel-electric locomotives are be-

 

*Ugol XII, 1940.

* SID, USSR, Volume I.

‘This, most significantly, is the output independ-
ently arrived at by JIB, 3/83 of May 49 for the total
coal consumption used on the railroads in 1948.

 

and employing an average of about 14,000 BTU for
coal to 19,000 BTU for oil, a ration of 1.3 has.been
used as a conversion factor for oil from hard coal.

a
Page-35
TOP

ing used, however, in those areas that cur-
rently use oil-burning steam locomotives, and
it appears reasonable to assume that the less
- efficient oil-burning units will be retired as
diesel-electric locomotives become available.

The over-all fuel requirements for the rail-
roads, therefore, will be affected only by the
small quantity of petroleum products needed
for lubricants. A Soviet source states that 28
kilograms of grease are allowed per run of 220
kilometers, and that during a month a locomo-
tive makes no less than 12 trips Unfor-
tunately, the kind of grease used is not made
clear, nor is it made clear whether the 28 kilo-
grams includes lubricants for the cars as well
as the locomotives. At 12 trips per month,
which appear low, the annual consumption of
lubricants would amount to 4.08 metric tons
per locomotive. Multiplied by the estimated
serviceable locomotive inventory for the year
1949, 104,224 metric tons of lubricants are re-
quired.”

3. Transportation Motor.

In order to determine the POL requirements
for the civilian motor transport industry for
any given year, it is necessary to estimate a
mid-year serviceable inventory of civilian
motor vehicles, and apply to that inventory
the estimated utilization of each vehicle and
the POL requirement for the estimated utili-
zation.

A mid-1949 serviceable inventory of all
trucks* was derived by combining postwar pro-
duction data (745,000 vehicles, 670,500 trucks,

 

‘The Agitator’s Notebook #33.

* This figure is Partially substantiated by US ex-
Perlence. Taking the average consumption per ton
and passenger kilometer of grease lubricating oil,
and kerosene by the US railroads during the period
1940-46, and applying it to Russian traffic statistics
for 1950, 124,327 metric tons of these products will
be required to carry the planned traffic. Although
the railroad system of the USSR and of the US
operate under vastly different conditions, in the
matter of lubricants per ton-kilometer and per pas-
senger kilometer, they are roughly comparable.

‘A reliable estimate of the number of passenger
buses is not available. The Soviets plan to produce
425,000 trucks in 1950 and 6,500 buses. The latter is
1.5 percent of the former, and this appears to be a
teasonable relationship for the inventory.

ECRET 31

see Table I) with an estimated 110,000 service-
able prewar or lend-lease vehicles.

The military inventories of trucks in 1949
has been estimated by the Intelligence Divi-
sion, Department of the Army. These inven-
tories do not distinguish between serviceable
and unserviceable military vehicles, consist en-,
tirely of gasoline trucks and do not include
any passenger or staff cars. However, from
these estimates it is possible to arrive at a
mid-year 1949 inventory of 418,607 military
gasoline trucks.

The mid-year 1949 inventory of all service-
able trucks, mentioned above, has been con-
verted to an inventory of all trucks on the
basis that 65 percent of the total inventory
represents serviceable trucks.’ Therefore the
mid-1949 inventory of all trucks amounted to
1,185,380 vehicles. The military inventory for
mid-1949 was subtracted from the total inven-
tory at mid-1949 in order to arrive at an esti-
mate of the number of trucks in the civilian
economy." This amounted to 498,405 service-
able civilian trucks in mid-1949,

Serviceable passenger car inventories were
built up on substantially the same basis as
trucks except that no passenger cars were as-
signed for military use for the reason given.
Ten thousand prewar and lend-lease motor
cars plus postwar production were estimated
to be the serviceable inventory by mid-1949.

Having obtained the average serviceable in-
ventories for the year 1949, POL requirements

 

* Serviceable prewar or lend-lease vehicles in mid-
1945 are estimated as follows: 65,000 trucks, 2 tons
or less, 10.8 miles per gallon of fuel; 33,000 trucks,
2% or 3 tons, 7 miles per gallon of fuel; 2,000 diesel
trucks, 4 miles per gallon of fuel; 10,000 passenger
cars, 10 miles per gallon of fuel. (Based on data
taken from D. B. Shimkin, “The Automobile Indus-
try That's Behind the Iron Curtain,” as derived from
S. A. Akolzin, “Specifications of the Motor-Vehicles
of the USSR”).

* The Soviet truck Inventory was estimated at 65
percent serviceable at the end of 1947 “Soviet Roll-
ing Stock and Motor Vehicle Industries,” ORE 42-48,
1 September 1948. There is no evidence that this
percentage of serviceable trucks has changed mate-
rially by 1949.

*No distinction has been made in the types of
trucks held by the military and_those in use by the
civilian economy, except that no Diesel trucks have
been allocated to the military.

a ee
Page-36
ror fcr

32
TABLE I
POSTWAR PRODUCTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES’
Total Light Heavy
Pas- Pas- Pas-
Year Total Total Light Medium Diesel senger senger senger
End Vehicles Trucks Trucks Trucks Trucks Cars Cars Cars
(100%) (90%) (45%) (42%) (3%) (10%) (7.5%) (2.5%)
1945 95,000 85,500 42,750 39,900 2,850 4,500 7,125 2,375
1946 130,000 117,000 58,500 54,600 3,900 13,000 9,750 3,250
1947 170,000 153,000 76,500 ‘71,400 5,100 17,000 12,750 4,250
1948 200,000 180,000 90,000 84,000 6,000 20,000 15,000 5,000
1949 300,000 270,000 135,000 126,000 9,000 30,000 22,500 7,500
Total (1945-49) 895,000 805,500 402,750 375,900 26,850 89,500 67,125 22,375
Total (1945-Mid49) 745,000 670,500 335,250 307,900 22,350 74,500 55,875 18,625

* Based on plant by plant analysis made possible through receipt of a number of intelligence reports on
individual plants. The most reliable reports appear to be those which have been supplied by means of in-

terrogating German and Japanese prisoners of war.

were estimated on the basis of an average utili-
zation of 20,000 miles per vehicle per year for
trucks’ and 10,000 miles per vehicle per year
for passenger cars* and a weighted average

 

‘The figure of 20,000 miles per truck was derived
as =
. The 1950 plan calls for a freight turnover of
25.4 billion ton-kilometers or 69.5 million ton-
kilometers per day.

b. Available to carry this freight will be: 391,701
light trucks (50 percent of total civilian truck
inventory) ; 352,534 medium trucks (47 percent
of total civilian truck inventory minus 1.3 per-
cent of total vehicle inventory, or 15,665
buses) ; and 23,502 heavy trucks (3 percent of
total civilian truck inventory).

c. Assuming that the light trucks carry an aver-
age payload of 1 ton, the medium trucks 2
tons,.and the heavy trucks 3 tons, a total of
1,167,275 tons may be carried at one time. To
produce 69.5 million ton-kilometers per day,
each truck must travel 69,500,000 divided by
1,167,275 or 59.5 kilometers per day. In terms
of miles this amounts to 36.9 per day, or 13,469
per year.

d. Assuming loaded haulage to be 2/3 of total
travel, the figure of 13,469 miles is increased
to 20,206 total miles per truck per year and
rounded off to 20,000 miles.

e. This figure is supported by data in “Legkye
Metally” No. 7 July 1936, which states that
motor vehicles operate on an average 125
kilometers per day for 275 working days in a
year. Seventy-one kilometers represent the
average daily loaded movement.

*No basis for this estimate. It is purely a judg-
ment figure.

fuel consumption of 7 miles per gallon for gas-
oline trucks, 6.4 miles per gallon for diesel
trucks, 15 miles per gallon for light passenger
cars, and 10 miles per gallon for heavy pas-
senger cars.‘ Consumption of lubricating oil
and grease was computed on the basis of 5 per-
cent of the gasoline and diesel oil requirement
by weight." See Table II, Appendix B, p. 33
for POL requirements for the year 1949.

 

‘Based on data contained in S, A. Akolzin, “Speci-
fication of the Motor Vehicles of the USSR.”
(Journal of the Auto-Tractor Industry Moscow,
1937, No. 15) and D. B, Shimkin, “The Automobile
Industry That's Behind the Iron Curtain.” Con-
sumption of Diesel trucks assumed to be same as
5 ton YAZ truck.

*These figures are calculated on the basis of 5
percent of gasoline and Diesel oi] requirements by
weight. This percentage was selected as reasonable
in the light of United States experience. For the
three years, 1944, 1945, and 1946 United States inter-
city truck and bus operators filing statistics with
the Interstate Commerce Commission reported aver-
ages of 4.76 miles per gallon of fuel and 327.2 miles
per gallon of lubricating oil. In other words, .21
gallons of fuel were used for every .003 gallons of
oil, for a ratio of 70 to 1. In terms of metric tons,
with one gallon of gasoline weighing 6.2 pounds and
one gallon of lubricating oil 7.5 pounds, the ratio
becomes 57.8 to 1. The amount of oil used, there-
fore represents 1.7 percent of the total weight of
the gasoline. Making allowance for grease con-
sumption and the possible less efficient use of lubri-
cants and grease in the U.S.S.R., the use of 5 per-
cent as the basis of calculation seemed a reasonable
estimate.

fo
Page-37
ror loner

USSR MOTOR VEHICLE INVENTORY AND CIVILIAN MOTOR .
TRANSPORT POL REQUIREMENTS

TABLE I

USSR MID-YEAR INVENTORY OF SERV-
ICEABLE MOTOR VEHICLES

1 July 1949

Trucks, 2 tons and under 400,250
Trucks, 24% and 3 tons 345,900
Diesel Trucks 24,350
Total Serviceable Trucks 770,500
Light Passenger Cars 60,875
Heavy Passenger Cars 23,625
Total Passenger Cars 84,500
Buses * oe

Total Serviceable Vehicles 855,000

 

‘Included with trucks. Estimated to represent
approximately 1.5 percent of total.

TABLE II

USSR MID-YEAR INVENTORY OF CIVIL-
IAN MOTOR VEHICLES

1 July 1949

Total Trucks 1,185,380
Total Military Trucks 418,602
Total Civilian Trucks 766,778
Civilian Serviceable Trucks

Gasoline Trucks 474,055

Diesel Trucks 24,350

Total 498,405
Buses *
Serviceable Passenger Cars:

Light 60,875

Heavy 23,625,

Total 84,500

 

‘Included with trucks. Estimated to represent
approximately 1.5 percent of total.

4. Industrial Requirements.

Combining the Manufacturing and Mining
Industry, industrial consumption of petro-
leum products in 1949 is largely estimated on
the basis of the 1937-1940 trend of petroleum
consumption by industry, on the one hand,

TABLE OI

POL REQUIREMENTS FOR CIVILIAN
MOTOR VEHICLES

 

Gasoline 1949
Passenger Cars
Light ' 111,401
Heavy’ 64,969
Total 176,370
Trucks'*:
Total 3,730,812
Diesel Oil
Trucks‘:
Total 249,344
Lubricating Oil and Grease*
Total 207,826
Total POL 4,364,352

‘Computed on basis of average utilization of
10,000 miles per vehicle per annum at 15 miles per
gallon.

*Computed on basis of average utilization of
10,000 miles per vehicle per annum at 10 miles per
gallon.

“Computed on basts of average utilization of
20,000 miles per vehicle per annum at weighted
average of 7 miles per gallon.

‘Computed on basis of average utilization of
20,000 miles per vehicle per annum at 6.4 miles per
gallon.

‘Computed on basis of 5 percent of gasoline
and diesel oil requirements by weight.

and the estimated trend of industrial con-
sumption in the postwar period.

From 1937 to 1940, consumption of petro-
leum products by industry increased by ap-
proximately 19.2 percent, ie., 4.76 million
metric tons in 1937' to 5.68 million metric
tons in 1940.7. While industrial consumption
of petroleum products increased in tonnage

*COI (OSS) Report #58, “The Effect of Territorial
Losses on Russia’s Petroleum Position,” 20 May 1942.
This report used the following Soviet publication
for its estimate: Planovoye Khozyaistvo, 1937, No.
2, p. 34.

*See Table A2, footnote i, R&A No. 2516, 30 April
1945, p. 20. ~

re... ~
Page-38
34 TOP

during the 1937-1940 period, industry con-
sistently accounted for approximately 23 per-
cent of the total annual petroleum consump-
tion when made relative to the other major
categories of consumers.

The 1950 goals for plant equipment call for
an increase of about 40 percent over the 1940
levels. Since present productivity has not yet
reached the 1940 rates in many industries, it
is highly unlikely that the Plan will come near
attainment, surely not during 1949.

Assessment of the postwar activity level in
industry is exceedingly difficult, with only
meager and intangible evidence available.
Rather than apply an arbitrary increase in
the rate of activity in industry to petroleum
consumption, it is estimated that petroleum
consumption will be approximately the same
as in 1940, namely 5.6 million metric tons.

Consumption of roughly 1.1 million tons of
oil by Power Stations was incorporated to-
gether with Manufacturing and Mining un-
der Industry.’ In subsequent years, it ap-
pears that the relative importance of coal and
the generation of electricity increased, while
that of fuel oil decreased. As such, the total
consumption of petroleum products by the
Mining and Manufacturing Industry together
with Electric Power Industry is estimated to
be 6.7 million metric tons in 1949. Once
again, it was found that industry accounted
for 23 percent of the total estimated petro-
leum consumption by the Soviet economy.

5. Shipping.

a. Merchant Shipping.

The current status of the sea-going mer-
chant fleet under Soviet registry comprises
about 522 vessels of 1,000 gross tons and over.
Of this total, 201 are oil-burning vessels,
namely, 89 diesel-powered ships and 112
steamships powered by fuel oil.

In the Caspian Sea there are 119 vessels of
more than 1,000 gross tons, 92 of them tank-
ers, 27 freighters. Of the tankers, 21 are
diesel-powered and 71 use fuel oil. Of the
freighters, 10 are diesel-powered and 17 use
fuel oil.

In calculating the estimated consumption
and requirement of petroleum products by

‘JIB 3/73. “The Consumption of Oil in the
USSR,” January 1949, p. 13.

 

ECRET

shipping, use was made of records of daily
consumption of fuel oil and diesel oil by
tankers and freighters, as recorded for indi-
vidual Soviet ships. Where no record was
available of the consumption record of a spe-
cific ship, it was assigned a consumption rate
equal to that of a ship of equal tonnage.
Consumption was computed on the basis of
the actual number of ships in each gross ton-
nage class, multiplied by the average daily
consumption rate of that tonnage class, since
consumption rates vary as the tonnage in-
creases.

Days at sea and in port were based on cer-
tain actual performance records kept by War
Shipping Administration for US freighters,
and by the Armed Services Petroleum Board
for USNT tankers. An arbitrary reduction
of 20 percent in days at sea for freighters, and
of 10 percent for tankers was applied to So-
viet ships to allow for less efficient operation,
especially on loading and discharging, and for
poor condition, lack of repair facilities, etc.,
as compared with US operations.

Days at sea and in port were assumed to be:

(1) Freighters: 160 days at sea; 205 days

in port.

(2) Tankers: 215 days at sea; 150 days in

port.

The assumption of CIA that a ship in port
consumes 20 percent of the amount of fuel
consumed at sea was used.

It has been estimated that Soviet shipping
requirements in 1949 are as follows:

POL REQUIREMENTS

Fuel Oil Metric Tons
Freighters (deep sea) 134,036
Freighters (Caspian) 422,219
Tankers (deep sea) 50,780
Tankers (Caspian) 65,145

Total fuel oil 1,272,180

Diesel Oil
Freighters (deep sea) 98,770
Freighters (Caspian) 8,271
Tankers (deep sea) 40,593
Tankers (Caspian) 49,271

Total diesel oil 196,905
Total deep water requirements 924,179
Total Caspian requirements 544,906

Total requirements ~1,469,085

a ga
Page-39
rorféecner 35

b. Inland Waterways POL Requirements.

In order to estimate total POL require-
ments for the inland waterways, it is neces-
sary to obtain information on the horsepower
inventory of the river fleet, the composition of
this inventory by types of fuel consumed, the
annual number of hours of operation of all
self-propelled oil-burning vessels, and the
fuel consumption per horsepower hour of
operation.

Mid-year inventories of serviceable vessels
have been used in these computations, since a
mid-year inventory represents the average
number of vessels available throughout the
year. It has been estimated that the horse-
power inventory of the river fleet will be
850,000 at the end of 1949 and 910,000 at the
end of 1950.' Mid-year inventories for these
years may be derived by subtracting one-half
of the total yearly increment from the end of
year inventory for each year, thus giving
820,000 in 1949 and 880,000 in 1950.

No reliable data are available on which can
be based allocation of the total horsepower
inventory to coal and oil-burning vessels. A
British report* states that 75 percent of the
vessels consume oil and quotes an American
report’ to the effect that the steam-diesel ra-
tiois2tol. A serviceability of 90 percent of

 

*The 1941 total inventory of self-propelled river
vessels was estimated at 3,600 units and 810,000
horsepower. (Strategic Intelligence Digest, USSR,
Volume ILI, Transportation, pp. 1-4.) An official
Soviet source has claimed that 4,000 vessels of all
types were destroyed during the war. (River
Transport, 31 October 1947.) In order to determine
the number of self-propelled river vessels at the end
of the war, the prewar Proportion of self-propelled
vessels to total vessels was applied to the total ves-
sels destroyed during the war and this number was
subtracted from the prewar inventory. Based on
the prewar average horsepower Per vessel, it appears
that in 1945, self-propelled vessels had a total of
610,000 horsepower. The current Five Year plan
calls for an increase of self-propelled river vessels
totaling 300,000 horsepower. On the assumption
that there will be an increment of 60,000 horse-
Power annually, the total horsepower inventory at
the end of 1949 will be 850,000 and at the end of
1950, 910,000.

* JIB 3/73.

* SID, op. cit.

the inventory appears reasonable.* The total
serviceable inventory is therefore estimated
as follows:

TABLE I

SERVICEABILITY MID-YEAR INVENTORY
OF OIL-BURNING RIVER VESSELS

 

: 1949

Diesel horsepower 182,655
Oil-steam horsepower 370,845
Total (75 percent of entire fleet) 553,500

It is believed that a maximum of 200 days
of operation annually is typical for the aver-
age river vessel." A Soviet source states that
river boats are in motion 37.2 percent of the
time.’ Accordingly, the average number of
hours of operation, 1,786 per self-propelled
river boat per year is derived.

The horsepower hours of operation by types
of oil-burning vessels are therefore as follows:

TABLE II
HORSEPOWER HOURS OF OPERATION
1949
Diesel oil 326,221,830
Fuel oil 662,329,170

Based on data computed from a British Re-
Port,‘ .000312 metric tons of diesel oil are con-
sumed per horsepower by diesel river vessels
and .000223 metric tons of fuel oil are con-
sumed per horsepower hour by river vessels
burning fuel oil. No firm basis exists for the
computation of the consumption of lubricat-
ing oil and grease. Although this is not a
significant figure in the total Soviet POL con-
sumption, for completeness some allowance

 

‘The British Report JIB 3/73 estimates a service-
ability of 80 percent, but this does not appear rea-
sonable because 300,000 horsepower of the total of
910,000 horsepower will have been constructed dur-
ing the preceding five years,

*N. N. Baronskiy, Economic Geography of the
USSR, 8th ed. Moscow, 1947, p. 63. A British Report.
(JIB 3/73) estimates that the river fleet works an
average of 16 hours daily, 6 days a week, 6 months
in the year, but this estimate is not supported in
any way. 7

*An Inquiry Into the Economics of Railroad
Transportation, Moscow, 1948.

‘JIB 3/73.

ees
Page-40
36 ror gener

should probably be made for it. Therefore, 5
percent of the total fuel and diesel oil con-
sumption has been allocated for lubricating
oil and grease for the vessels consuming fuel
and diesel oil. The same amount of lubricat-
ing oil and grease consumed per horsepower
hour by fuel and diesel oil vessels has been ap-
plied to the horsepower hours produced by ves-
sels burning coal and wood. Accordingly, the
lubricating oil and grease consumption of the
entire river fleet has been obtained.

The following table presents fuel, diesel and
lubricating oil and grease requirements of the
tiver fleet for the year 1949.

TABLE III
POL REQUIREMENTS OF THE RIVER
FLEET
(Metric tons)
1949
Diesel oil 101,781
Fuel oil 147,699
Lubes and grease 16,608
Total 266,088
6. Pipelines.

The POL requirements for pipeline opera-
tion is based on the assumption that 50 per-
cent of the pipelines are operated by diesel
power at 50 percent capacity 100 percent of
the time.

To determine the diesel fuel requirement
the factor .000312 tons per horsepower hour'
was applied to 25 percent of the horsepower
hour requirements.

used principally by the urban-population for
heating purposes and that kerosene was used
chiefly by the rural population for lighting
and cooking purposes. .

Home Use consumption of light fuel oil in-
creased more rapidly than consumption of
kerosene in the postwar period, reflecting con-
tinuation of the trend toward greater urbani-
zation in the Soviet Union. Also, more ex-
tensive use of kerosene is likely to be offset by
increased rural electrification and natural gas
will probably be more widely used in the cities
than before the war. Nevertheless, rural
electrification and natural gas is expected to
eliminate the consideration of kerosene. In
view of the Soviet policy to maintain a rela-
tively high state of military preparedness, it
is believed that the Soviet Government will
expend further effort in restricting civilian
home consumption of kerosene and fuel oil.
Therefore, consumption in 1949 will be prob-
ably no greater than the total allocated in
1940, namely, 2.7 million metric tons;* a
slightly greater availability of kerosene and
fuel oil to Home Use has been shown to com-
pensate to some degree the trend toward
greater urbanization in the USSR.

8. Military Requirements of Refined Products.

Soviet military requirements of refined
products for the period being considered have
been prepared by the Department of the
Navy, ONI, and the Intelligence Division, War
Department General Staff.

POL REQUIREMENTS, PIPELINES

 

1949 Mid-year Mileage Pumping Stations Hphr. (25% Total) Diesel Fuel
No. Av. Hp. Total Hp. (Metric Tons)
Oil 7,430 92.9 895.6 83,204 182,466,346 56,929
Gas 1,192 14.9 2,087.7 31,108 68,220,028 21,285
Total 78,214

7. Home Use Requirements.

In estimating the postwar consumption of
kerosene and fuel oil by Home Use, it was as-
sumed that domestic burning or light oil is

 

* JIB 3/73

*Prewar consumption:
1937-—2.3 million metric tons (10.8 percent of
total consumption)
1940—2.7 million metric tons (9.8 percent of
total consumption)
Ref. CDI (OSS) Report #58, The Effect of Terri-
torial Losses on Russia’s Petroleum Position,
20 May 1942, pp. 28-34, 37-41. 7 :

—_
Page-41
ror fecnst

APPENDIX B

TRANSPORTATION

1. Distribution of Military POL Consumption
Assuming War in 1949,

a. Problem.

To estimate the capabilities of the USSR
transportation system to distribute the So-
viet military POL requirements in the event
of war during 1949 within the country and to
the borders, and to estimate the amount of
POL that will be in transit in order to insure
sufficient supplies where and when needed.

b. Assumptions.

(1) The total military POL requirements
are those set out specifically in JIG 278/6-
12,675,990 metric tons.'

(2) The Soviets will have stocked in the
jump-off area sufficient POL to last for the
duration of the ground and air campaigns in-
cluding the periods of combat and inactivity
(1,316,150 metric tons); the Black Sea Naval
Forces’ requirement will not need transporta-
tion (824,090 metric tons); the distribution of
POL will include the ground and air require-
ments for the occupation and for forces within
the USSR and the entire naval requirement
needing transportation (10,535,750 metric
tons).

(3) The total military requirement will be
supplied from production within the USSR.

(4) The movement of the military POL re-
quirement will be given highest priority on
the USSR transportation system.

(5) The average loaded petroleum tank car
and general purpose freight car on the Soviet
railroads will produce approximately 3,000
ton miles per day.

‘The Soviet military POL requirements have been
revised to total 13.1 MMT. For the purposes of the
Present report, however, the original figure of 12.6
MMT requirements has been retained which would
otherwise require recalculations throughout the re-
port. The slight difference between the two figures

does not in any way alter the conclusions arrived
at in the study.

 

c. Discussion.

(1) Under the assumption that the move-
ment of the military POL requirement would
be given highest priority on the USSR trans-
portation system, railroad transportation of
POL in tank cars would be used, whenever it
is economical, for all products except lubri-
cants. Lubricants would be ‘packaged in
drums, barrels, or cans at the refineries and
shipped to consuming areas in general pur-
pose freight cars. If the entire military POL
requirement were shipped on the railroads,
this movement would require the use of a to-
tal of 28,320 tank cars for aviation gasoline,
motor gasoline, Diesel, fuel and jet oils, and
1,363 general purpose cars for lubricants.

(2) Inasmuch as there are currently only
about 40,000 serviceable tank cars in the
USSR, the movement of the military POL re-
quirement would demand a substantial part
of the total serviceable tank car supply, but
the inventory of general purpose freight cars
is so large that the military requirement for
this type of car is almost insignificant. Ac-
cordingly, if the entire military POL require-
ment is distributed on the railroads, the So-
viet tank car position would be severely
strained and leave an inadequate number of
tank cars for the distribution of civilian and
industrial POL needs in the event of war. It
is not likely, however, that the total military
requirement of aviation and motor gasoline,
Diesel, jet and fuel oils would be moved ex-
clusively by tank cars or that the military
POL requirement would be hauled entirely
on the railroads.

(3) Some of the military POL requirements
in addition to lubricants can be packaged in
drums, barrels, or cans at the refineries and
shipped to consuming areas also in general
purpose freight cars. This would be most
feasible in connection with short hauls of mo-
tor gasoline. Moreover, it is entirely possible

i a
Page-42
38 C« TOP

that the internal ground and air require-
ments of motor and aviation will be moved by
tank or general purpose motor trucks when
the consuming centers are in close proximity
to refineries. Water transportation can also
be used to fulfill part of the Baltic and Arctic
Naval and Merchant Marine requirement, and
this type of transportation can also be used
for the purpose of reducing the rail haul by
transporting POL from the Caucasus by way
of the Caspian Sea and Volga River or the
Black Sea to rail transshipment points nearer
the consuming areas. Pipelines, particu-
larly the one extending from Armavir to
Tradovaya, can be used to reduce the require-
ment for transportation by railroad tank car
(Appendix A).

(4) Based on the Speed of railroad tank
car movement, a total of 239,000 metric tons
of POL will have to be in transit on the rail-
Toads at all times during the year in order to
insure that supplies will be available when
and where needed. Because other forms of
surface transportation are generally slower
than railroad transportation, a considerably
larger amount of POL would have to be in
transit if other forms of transportation, in
addition to the railroads, are used in the dis-
tribution of POL (Appendix B).

d. Conclusion.

(1) The USSR. transportation system could
distribute the Soviet military POL require-
ments in the event of war during 1949.

(2) The amount of POL that would have to
be in transit in order to insure that sufficient
military supplies are available where and
when needed is a minimum of 239,000 metric
tons.

2. Military Supply Administration.

a. Supply System and Packaging.

In the late war, the Russians followed no
set system of supply administration in the
field. The distances between railroad and
army dumps and thence to divisional dumps
were governed less by terrain or strategic
conditions than by existing railway facilities.
Cases occurred where horse-drawn supply col-
umns had to lift supplies from the railhead
and carry them 60 miles to Army dumps, but

CRET

the average distance was about 25 miles. The
tendency was to assemble large numbers of
small dumps within Army or Divisional areas
rather than build up large central dumps.
Almost all dumps were small by western
standards. Consequently, in spite of the
improvised nature of the supply system,
wastage from all causes, and Particularly
from enemy action, was probably relatively
small. Packaging received through Lend-
Lease, particularly standard steel barrels,
was undoubtedly widely used and re-used.
The USSR also received under Lend-Lease
120 tank cars and a number of tank trucks.

The following is an extract from Strategic
Intelligence Digest, USSR, Chapter 6, Armed
Forces, ID, May 1948, and indicates the best
information available on the POL supply sys-
tem employed by the Soviet Armed Forces:

“During World War If, supply responsibility and
the system of supply in the Zone of the Interior
were the same as they are today. Supply units and
organizations in the combat zone was organized as
follows:

“Factories or central Storage depots supplying
combat echelons shipped equipment and supplies
to front (army group) depots, which were normally
located In the vicinity of railheads behind the rear
boundary of the command. These depots were
large semi-permanent installations containing sev-
eral days’ supply.

“From front depots, materiel was sent to army
field depots located at various stations in the rear
of the army zone anywhere from 30 to 60 miles
from the front line. The army depots usually
maintained stocks of 1 unit of fire, 3 to 4 rations,
and 2 refills of fuel and lubricants for the army,
although reserves were increased if protracted
offensive operations were in Prospect.

“Rifle corps during the war had very little supply
responsibility. They maintained no supply depots.
Aside from the supply of corps headquarters and
corps troops, supply personnel had only planning
and supervisory functions.

“Ammunition, fuel, food, and fodder were for-
warded to rifle division supply points by army
transport columns. Other supplies were drawn at
army depots by division transport columns. Nor-
mally division transport carried ammunition, fuel,
food, and fodder to regimental supply Points, al-
though horse-drawn columns of rifle Tegiments
sometimes obtained the latter three items at divi-
sion supply points.

“Unlike rifle corps, wartime tank and mechanized
corps maintained supply dumps. These were. nor-
mally located between crops and brigade or regi-

Oufere....
Page-43
TOP fenes 39

mental rear boundaries and were supplied by their
own motor vehicles from army field depots.

“Subordinate units were supplied by motor ve-
hicles of the tank or mechanized corps. In a rap-
idly developing situation, army transportation rein-
forced unit transportation.

“The combat supply system of the Soviets during
World War I was effictent and economical. Its
essentials would Probably be duplicated in a future

war. A distant extension of the theater of opera-
tions, however, would Probably result in the estab-
Ushment of communications zone between the zone
of interior and the combat zone. Moreover, now
that allotments of motor vehicles to units have
been greatly increased, the system of higher unit
distribution of supplies and equipment may be
amended to allow for units below army rting
forward their own supply requirements.”
Page-44
TOP foonst

APPENDIX B (1)

SOVIET CAPABILITIES TO TRANSPORT MILITARY POL
REQUIREMENTS IN THE EVENT OF WAR

1. Total Transportation Requirement.

The total POL requirement assumed to be
stockpiled and requiring transportation di-
vided by categories of products is tabulated

b. The total number of general purpose
freight cars needed for the transportation of
746,383,500 ton miles of lubricants is 1,363.

c. Transportation of POL supplies for the

below: occupation forces and the Navy will require
TYPE OF PRODUCT
‘ (Thousands of Metric Tons)
Gasoline Diesel Lubes Av.Gas FuelOil Jet Total
Stockpiled 650 334 97 206 None 29 1,316
Requiring Transportation 3,387 1,464 467 2,310 2,290 618 10,536
Black Sea Naval Requirements * 16 58 8 : 142 - 824

* Not considered as requiring transportation for purposes of this study as it will be filled by refineries
along coast and only ship-shore transportation will be needed.

2. Railroad Transportation.

a. If the railroads were used exclusively for
the transportation of the total military POL
requirement, this movement would amount to
a total of 16,249,063,500 ton miles or six per-
cent of the total Soviet railroad traffic in 1948.
The Soviets would use tank cars to the great-
est extent possible for all products except lu-
bricants. The total number of serviceable
tank cars needed to carry the 15,502,680,000
ton miles representing all products éxcept lu-
bricants is as follows:

Number of Percent

Product Tank Cars of Total
Gasoline 6,990 25
Diesel 3,375 12
Av. Gas 8,074 28
Fuel Oil 8,934 32
Jet 947 3
Total 28,320 100

Ep Vang

18,620 tank cars or 66 percent of the total.
By services, these are divided as follows:

Percent
Service No. of Cars of Total
Ground Force 2,983 16
Air Force 5,379 29
Navy 10,258 55

d. The transportation problem is clearly
high-lighted by the following table which
shows that of the total of 18,620 tank cars
needed to supply the occupation forces and
the Navy, a total of 13,023 tank cars or 70 per-
cent will be needed to supply the forces in the
Far East.

USING SERVICE
DESTINATION OF

SHIPMENTS Ground Air Navy
(Tank Cars Needed)

Western Europe 1,591 1,235
Middle East 72 62
Far East 1,320 4,082
Black Sea a 0
Baltic 2,217
Arctic a ~ 420
Pacific 7,621
Page-45
42 TOP rors

e. Zone of the Interior ground and air
forces will require 9,700 tank cars for the
transportation of POL or 34 percent of the
total number. Here again the substantial
demands on transportation for supplying the
Far East are brought clearly to light, for 4,420
tank cars or 46 percent of the total needed to
supply Zone of the Interior forces will have
to be engaged in transportation to the Far
Eastern region.

f. Method Used in Estimating Railroad
Transportation Requirements.

(1) Annex “A” to this appendix sets out in
detail the POL requirements by types of prod-
ucts of each user, the economic region or re-
gions from which the POL will have to be
transported, the total number of ton miles
and cars required for each movement, and the
total transport burden measured in ton miles
and cars. Annex “B” is a map which pre-
sents graphically the POL requirements by
campaigns and economic regions.

(2) The ground force occupation needs
were computed on the basis of the number of
refills estimated in JIG 278/6. Air force oc-
cupation needs and ground and air force
needs within the Zone of Interior, were fur-
nished by the Joint Intelligence Group. The
breakdown of Naval requirements by areas
was prepared by the Ad Hoc Petroleum Distri-
bution Committee.

(3) The location of refinery production by
economic.regions was furnished by the CIA.

(4) In computing the transport burden,
the needs of each user for POL were filled
from available production closest to the user.
Railroad mileages for each shipment were
taken from the Soviet Railroad Timetable, ex-
cept in cases where the locations of produc-
tion or consumption were not definitely estab-
lished. In such cases an average railroad
mileage figure was used.

(5) In order to determine the total number
of tank cars the total annual transportation
requirement measured in ton miles was di-
vided by one-half the loaded ton miles that
can be produced annually by each serviceable
tank car. It is believed that the average ca-
pacity of a tank car carrying petroleum prod-
ucts in the USSR is approximately 16 tons and
that the average car miles per car day will be

about 186 miles. The product of tons and car
miles is 2,976 or 3,000 ton miles per loaded
tank car per day. Inasmuch as the empty
tank car movement will approximately equal
the loaded movement, the average effective
ton miles produced per tank car is 1,500 ton
miles. The annual effective ton miles pro-
duced per tank car will be 365 times the effec-
tive daily movement or 547,500 ton miles pro-
duced per tank car yearly. The annual ton-
mile requirement for the distribution of POL
amounting to 15,502,680,000 ton miles was
then to obtain the total tank car requirement
of 28,320 cars. The same process was re-
peated to obtain the requirement of 1,363 gen-
eral-purpose freight cars needed to transport
lubricants.

3. Alternative Means of Transport for POL.

a. An assumption in this paper is that POL
would have highest transport priority. Under
this assumption, therefore, it appears that the
total requirement would move by railroad and
that all products would move by tank car ex-
cept lubricants in all instances unless the
movements were not economical. Neverthe-
less, alternative means of transport are avail-
able for some movements and it appears that
in other instances packaging of products in
addition to lubricants, particularly motor gas-
oline, might be found to be more economical
than the exclusive use of tank cars.

b. Study of the individual movements de-
scribed in Annex “A” reveals that the follow-
ing alternative means of transport might be
used:

(1) Column A can be supplied from Region
IV via the Volga River as far as Moscow and
thence by rail or via the Volga to Leningrad
and thence by tanker to German ports on the
Baltic. Packaging facilities might be estab-
lished either at the refineries or at the Volga
transshipment point. In either case the sav-
ing would be 168 tank cars.

(2) Column D can be supplied via Black
Sea tankers and the Danube or by packaging
either at the refineries or after traversing the
Black Sea. Saving: 109 tank cars.

(3) It is not likely that the advantages of
speedy bulk shipments in tank cars will be de-
nie ns Band C. However, the pipeline
Page-46
ror gfener 43

from Armavir to Trudovaya may be used for
the finished products to reduce the rail haul
from Region IV.

(4) The Scandinavian Campaign could be
supplied from Region IV via the Volga and
thence to Norway, Sweden, and Denmark by
tanker. Saving: 366 tank cars.

(5) The Italian, Greek, Middle Eastern, and
Turkish Campaigns require a short haul of
only 100 miles from Regions IV and V to the
border points or ports. Some small quanti-
ties lend themselves to packaging for rail ship-
ment and motor transport could move the re-
mainder. Possible saving: 124 tank cars.

(6) The air force tank car requirement for
Western Europe could be reduced in the same
manner described for Column A and Column
Dof the ground force. Saving: 531 tank cars.

(1) The air force requirement for the Mid-
dle East and Turkish Campaigns amount to
only 62 tank cars daily. In an emergency the
air force in this area could supply itself.

(8) Movement of the Baltic and Arctic Na-
val requirements amount to 2,390 tank cars.

While there is no possibility of packaging this
requirement, it is possible that a considerable
amount of it could move by water transport.

(9) The Zone of Interior ground and air
forces need 9,700 tank cars for POL supply.
However, where POL supplies are available
close by and particularly within the regions
it should be possible to reduce the dependence
on rail transport through the use of organic
transport of the military units. The use of
such transport and other motor transport
when available should serve to reduce the de-
pendence on tank cars by at least a third.

c. Therefore, whereas it might be possible
to reduce somewhat the over-all dependence
on rail and tank car transportation for the
shipment of POL supplies, there are certain
POL shipments that would have to depend on
rail tank car movement. These would be the
shipment to the Far East, a large amount of
the shipments to the Baltic and Arctic fleets,
and certain high priority shipments for the
ground and air force campaigns in Western
Europe.
Page-47
TOP plover

APPENDIX B (2)

AMOUNT OF POL IN TRANSIT

1. Total Amount of POL in Transit by Railroad.

The total amount of POL in transit at all
times during the year in order to insure that
supplies are available where and when needed
will amount to 239,000 metric tons. A break-
down of the amount in transit by products is
as follows:

Product Metric Tons
Aviation Gasoline 65,000
Motor Gasoline 56,300
Jet Fuel 7,620
Diesel Fuel 27,180
Fuel Oil 72,000
Lubricants 10,900

Lp AA Wank’

2. Method Used in Estimating Amount in
Transit.

The total number of annual ton miles was
divided by the total annual number of tons
requiring railroad transportation and an aver-
age length of haul of 1,540 miles was obtained.
The average number of days per shipment was
then secured by dividing the average length
of haul by 186 car miles per car day which
resulted in an average length of shipment of
8.28 days. By multiplying 8.28 days by the
average daily shipment of 28,865 tons, a total
of 239,000 tons in transit is indicated. This
process was repeated for each of the products.
Page-48
==

 

oe
mes
siren sor sem wn an He
Tint Sane we moe ee a
witty 66 (Thousands of Metric Tons)
As Defined 13. Stookpaled Requiring Transport
‘NG 2718/6 Comoline Dicoal Labes Av.Gas Pool O11 Jet Gasoline Diesel Inbee Aycan Pos) O11 Jet
Colum 4 6.30 48 2,08 6.09 19.6 46
Colm B 105045 a 27 TT THOk wie
Colam ¢ 59.B 42,00 pd 18h B Do
Colman D ebb BF 2.90 An 5h 30
‘Scandinavian 2.60 10.76 3B 5.0 336 10.02
Ttalan D-Day aa 2% wa 5159 30,63 ema
Talim D4 50 72 ‘9AT 272 cot 902 56h
Greeie 85,60 B86 DAs 309 B.D Us62
Middle Last P crs 10,45 3.26 ua 57 1a
‘Middle Tact @ 30,85 vo ell, 1593 én 2
moan ne 3S
or ee a 2
Boe == ma
ma an mat cn ue te
ms. a eS io 3S te
| ‘Turkey Rast 12h 3.20 1.04, 8.60 3.80 32h

= ee oo oe im
im oe ae ha a3 Gk ak
Air Toroe Nestern Barope ) 49.60 BaD 382,00 122.60
‘Ma Foree Hiedle East =) TI 5.90 0660 3.90 58.90 4.20 6.20 Cr
dar Poros Par Fast d 305.80 8.50 71,00 70219
Neval Force Black Sea* 168 62h TAL
ae oe a orn
oe once ts om mom
fran ft an on srs
Totals 649.87 334.26 52 26.0 28,90 1261.09 182.03 799.90 289,69 229.80
a
‘Region T 134420 B10 0 2650 58420
vena ae ome he ime as
‘Region TIT 327,90 130,70 2.70 228.50 58.20
Regicn IF 124.90 61,00 6,00 45,30 1.60
tea mS Gs OTSoae s
ae ce ee oe we
ae we ome Ge ke =
was ce se te aoe xe
van 2 ce SSIS xe
Ragin oT 224,20 61,00 ¥00 45.20 1.60
Region XI MELE 2.00 19,90 105.70 220
‘Region TI 329.70 130,70 43670 256,70 6.00
‘Totals 3386.99 16.24 467.33 2309.90 29.4 627.60,

Be ae as
7 + 8 2

note isis SELLE apes ae tam tng

oi ant ere tn TE rag Ae A ae ari otn

+ Totels to nearest hundred tons Interior Ground = Aly Farees, Joint Intelligence Croup,

s+ Iaplnten Black See Fleet,

rorMhoner
Page-49
seeeeetasaaaaad

GshtSseesseussss¥eeee?

ae oe

Bxtsday vevesess

 

 

 

 

aE OE,

Tbuty peereesteEee

 

Bese ssssszaanaaaa

2
faa

 

 

UctSbeuvesveusuclienee

 

 

a

a
GR dadeveces a2

af

 

 

dasa
tse

 

wad
af Vieux ecen eg

 

 

ey

BS bles

fe

F

SG aked 48

HEE
Page-50
USSR P.O... REQUIREMENTS

IN EVENT OF WAR, 1949

anrennat, REQUIREMENTS

 

 

 

TOPSECRET S
Page-51
TOP

ECRET

APPENDIX C

SOVIET CAPABILITIES TO EXPLOIT MIDDLE EAST OIL*

The most important aspect of the Middle
East oil to the Soviet Union is the large po-
tential of crude oil supply with a mid-1949
production of 35 million metric tons (1,400,000
b/d), and the availability of a mid-1949 refin-
ing capacity totalling 44 million metric tons
(877,000 b/d). Included in the refining ca-
pacity is the potential of the Haifa refinery
which is not being operated at present. The
only refinery in the Middle East currently
producing high-octane aviation gasoline is at
Abadan, the largest refinery in the world.
This refinery has an annual capacity of 25
million metric tons of petroleum products.
The capacity and 1947 production of this re-
finery, of items of particular interest to the
USSR, are shown below:

(Millions of Metric Tons)

Annual 1947

Capacity Production
Gasoline 3.00 1.60
Avgas 1.16 1.16
Avgas—100 octane 1.10 1.00
Blending agents 40 not known

(for 100 octane
avgas prod.)

Soviet additions to the Soviet Air Force of
increasing numbers of bombers and jet planes
have increased the requirements for high oc-
tane gasoline and jet fuel. Owing to the lack
of highly specialized equipment needed in the
production of high octane gasoline, the USSR
will undoubtedly be confronted with a narrow
bottleneck, particularly as a result of this
shortage. Therefore, the acquisition of Mid-
dle East 100 octane aviation fuel, or the alkyl-
ate blending agents with which aviation fuel
could be produced from USSR indigenous
crude oil, would be of prime importance to the
Soviets since it would satisfactorily supple-

 

"For a detailed treatment of this subject see
J. 1. G. 278/5.

ment Soviet indigenous production and allow
for the fulfillment of their wartime military
requirements of combat aviation gasoline.
Also, there is the possibility that the Soviets
could transport to the USSR certain alkyla-
tion and catalytic cracking equipment at Aba-
dan, with the object of improving their inter-
nal production of 100 octane gasoline and
blending agents.

Another interest that would motivate So-
viet acquisition of the Middle East area is that
control of the Middle East would facilitate
the freedom of movement of any forces that
the Soviets might wish to employ in this area.
This would give the Soviets an important base
of operations and the availability of Middle
East petroleum products would amply support
their military operations in the area. It is
recognized that under Soviet management the
Middle East refineries and other facilities
would not be run at their present efficiency.
However, it is estimated that Soviet tech-
nicians would maintain a throughput volume
of two-thirds of the current rate. In the ab-
sence of Allied countermeasures, this rate
would amply suffice Soviet requirements in the
Middle East.

If the Soviets cannot utilize the refining
capacity of the Middle East, their primary ob-
jective would be to deny access of this im-
portant source of supply to the US. Soviet
control or neutralization of this area would
not only seriously curtail the petroleum supply
of the US but would also drain the oil supply
of the Western Hemisphere.

A significant limitation to any Soviet designs
in the Middle East is the inadequacy of trans-
portation facilities. In considering the diffi-
culties facing the Soviets in trying to overcome
the delivery of petroleum products, the ques-
tion of production and refining capacity, how-
ever important, becomes secondary. It is
estimated that the USSR could import from

CRET 47
Page-52
48 TOP

the Middle East no more than 90,000 metric
tons of oil per month or 1,095,000 metric tons
per year. If land transportation facilities
were continuously and exclusively employed
in hauling oil, the theoretical capacity of rail
and highway delivery from Iran and Iraq to
Soviet border points and/or Caspian Sea ports
is 1,825,000 metric tons per year. However,
the probable practical limit of transportation
capacity that would be attained under Soviet
management is estimated at 1,095,000 metric
tons per year. Assuming the theoretical max-
imum carrying capacity of the railroads and
highways could be employed and maintained,
the existing transportation facilities from the
Middle East to the USSR would be sufficient
to move only 8 percent of the present Persian
Gulf refinery output.

Soviet efforts to gain optimum utilization of
transportation facilities would be seriously
handicapped. The railroads available are re-
ported to be in poor condition, difficult to
maintain, and could be easily knocked out of
commission by air bombardment because of
tunnels in the rail net. The transportation of
petroleum products by highway would present
the extremely difficult problems of long dis-
tances, mountain terrain, and poor roads. The
Soviet Union could possibly attempt to build
a pipeline in order to speed the flow of Middle

* East petroleum products to the USSR. How-
ever, the mountainous and difficult terrain
would make the engineering problem ex-
tremely formidable. Experts who have studied
the situation have estimated that even if such
a pipeline could be constructed under the best
possible conditions, a minimum of two years
would be required before any benefit could
accrue from it.

The difficulty of transporting Middle East
petroleum products to the USSR can be mini-
mized or could be completely overcome only if
the Soviets directed an unwarranted amount
of equipment, labor, and planning, to the pro-
ject. Since the USSR is currently attempt-
ing and will continue to make an all-out effort
to increase its indigenous oil production, the
USSR could ill afford to transfer necessary
technical experts to the Middle East. There-

ECRET

fore, the principal Soviet operations in the
Middle East would probably be directed to
transporting highly critical products such as
aviation gasoline and other light fractions.

The Soviets could and undoubtedly would
transport aviation gasoline or any highly criti-
cal petroleum products by air. It does not ap-
pear likely, however, that the Soviets would
allocate all, or even a major portion, of their
air transport reserve for the purpose of haul-
ing Middle East oil products at the theoretical
maximum of 75,000-90,000 tons per month.
It is entirely unlikely that such a level of ac-
tivity would be maintained. The required con-
centration of air transports needed for this
operation would seriously affect Soviet trans-
port capabilities in other theaters where re-
serve air transport might well be more profit-
ably employed.

By utilizing all means of transportation, the
theoretical capacity of the Soviets for trans-
porting crude oil and/or petroleum products
from the Middle East to the USSR is estimated
to be from 10,200-10,700 metric tons per day,
depending on the availability of four-engine
transports. The probable practical limit in
metric tons is estimated to be as follows:

2 per day per month
By land routes to Soviet
border points and/or

 

Caspian Sea ports 3,000 90,000

By 300 regularly assigned

A/C 416 12,480
Total 3,416 102,480
Conclusion.

Even under favorable conditions extending
over a period of one year, the amount of crude
oil that could be transported practically from
the Middle East to the USSR would be but
a small fraction of current indigenous output
of the USSR and would scarcely warrant the
effort. On the other hand, the acquisition
of Middle East 100 octane aviation fuel or
alkylation polymerization and catalytic crack-
ing equipment would be of prime importance
to the Soviets since it would contribute ma-
terially to their war potential.
Page-53
TOP S

ET

APPENDIX D

THE RELATIVE POSITION OF THE USSR PETROLEUM INDUSTRY

The petroleum output of the United States
exceeds 200 million metric tons per year,
whereas the Soviet Union has only recently
managed to regain its 1940 level of 31 million
metric tons per year.

The relative positions of the petroleum in-
dustry in the United States and the Soviet
Union can be judged largely by production.
For example, of approximately 9,200,000
barrels per day of liquid petroleum including
light hydrocarbons currently produced in the
world, exclusive of Russia and Baltic coun-
tries, about 6,000,000 barrels or about 65 per-
cent are produced or can be produced within
the confines of the United States. Further,
of the 3,200,000 barrels of oil produced outside
the United States, about 40 percent is pro-
duced by companies of US ownership or in-
fluence and most of the remainder produced
in the world has become possible only by the
use of US developed techniques and equip-
ment. On the other hand, the Soviet produc-
tion constitutes only 6.1 percent of the world’s
total.

The over-all refining plant of the United
States is well balanced with respect to all
products, whereas the USSR is deficient in
equipment to make combat aviation gasoline.

Among the reasons for these divergencies
are: (1) contrast in technical and industrial
development in each country at the close of
World War I; (2) different effects of the recent
war upon each country; and (3) the great dis-
parity in the levels of education and other
basic factors relating to industrial produc-
tion.

Further evidence of the unequal progress
between the United States and the USSR is
that US oil interests have developed the Vene-
zuelan oil industry to a point where produc-
tion in Venezuela is twice that of the Soviet
Union. This achievement by US interests is
exemplified by the fact that oil output in the
Soviet Union and Venezuela was almost on
the same level before World War II.

Much of the field and refinery equipment of
the Soviet Union is out of date and, judged by
modern standards, inefficient in operation.
Also, the devastation of World War II has im-
peded both the necessary expansion of the in-
dustry and the maintenance and moderniza-
tion of existing facilities and equipment. The
Soviets are presently endeavoring to correct
the deficiency in materials and equipment by
expanding their manufacture at home. How-
ever, the supplies are slow in coming forward
and are poor in quality and design.

The Soviets have also instituted expanding
programs of exploration and drilling to make
good the exhaustion of old fields and further
increase crude oil output to a point where
production will reach 60 million tons by
1960. Even under the assumption that the
world production of petroleum will remain at
the present level in 1960, Soviet crude oil pro-
duction will constitute only 12.5 percent of
the world total. If the past performance of
the Soviet oil industry is used as a basis for
comparison, the Soviets cannot be expected to
make any spectacular improvements in the
near future.

a | 4
Page-54
roy Micrer

APPENDIX E

SOVIET CRUDE OIL REFINERIES

1. List of Crude Oil Refineries in the USSR.

(Capacities quoted in 1,000 metric tons per
year)

ECONOMIC REGION: NORTHWEST

Total
Crude Crack-
Throughput ing Cu-
Plant Location Capacity pacity
Leningrad “Shaumann” 100
Khotle Jarve 60 10
Riga 15
Ukhta 250
“Neft-Promisal”
Total Northwest 425 10
ECONOMIC REGION: SOUTH
Drogobych 50
“Nafta” 60
“Polmin” 160
“Calicia” 140
“Polskie” 40
Mukacevo
“Dal Karpati” 18
Odessa 250 * 225
Total South 668 275
* Questionable.
ECONOMIC REGION: SOUTHEAST
Grozny 6,410 2,355
Krasnodar 500
Makhach-Kala 50
Tuapse 500 311
TOTAL SOUTHEAST 7,460 2,666

 

 

ECONOMIC REGION: TRANSCAUCASUS

Baku Waterfront Group 14,440 1,715
Baku Akmedy 100
Batumi
“Stalin” refinery, 3,055 802
formerly “Asneft”
Tbilisi 20
Total Transcaucasus 17,615 2517

 

 

Total
Crude Crack-
Throughput ing Ca-
Plant Location ‘Capacity pacity
ECONOMIC REGION: VOLGA
Astrakhan 50
Batraki 200
Kuibyshev 469 998
Lend-Lease #3

Kazan 160
Saratov 2,011
Syzran 500 694
Total Volga 1,379 3,703

ECONOMIC REGION: CENTRAL INDUS-
TRIAL

 

Dzerzhinsk 150
Gorki
“26 Commissars 600
of Baku”
Konstantinovski 500 87
Moskva,
“Viadimirski” 500
“Koshkin” (Neftegas #1) 520 388

Total Central Industrial 2,270 475

 

 

ECONOMIC REGION: URALS

 

 

Chkalov 1,000
Chusovio 120
Ishimbayevo
“Novy Peregonny” 485
“Zavod”
Krasnokamsk 200
Orsk 1,460 678
Lend-Lease #2
Sterlitimak 460
Ufa 1,500 356
Total Urals 4,225 2,034
ECONOMIC REGION: WESTERN SIBERIA
Cheleken Island 160
Chimion 130

toyffGonst 51

[p- 50 blank}
Page-55
*

 

 

52 T oes RET
Total ECONOMIC REGION: EASTERN SIBERIA
Crude Crack- Cheremkhovo 36
Throughput .ingCa- Kemerovo 20
Plant Location Capacity pacity ‘Total Eastern Siberia 56
Guryev 573 1,005
nim ° ECONOMIC REGION: SOVIET FAR EAST
“Komsomolets” 300 Total
Crude Crack-
Krasnovodsk 500 Throughput ing Ca-
Krasnovodsk Plant Location Capacity pacity
Lend-Lease #4 521 1,042 Aleksandrovski 100
Nebit Dag 250 ~ 109 Khabarovsk
Stalinabad 300 “Ordzhonikidze” 200 135
Vannovskaya 500 ten, ed
Total Western Siberia 3,284 2,156 TT — =
SSS SSE Total Far East 1,000 135
Total USSR 38,332 13,971 |

 

 

 

2. Secondary Refinery List.
(Not Fully Confirmed)

ECONOMIC REGION: SOUTH

 

Plant Location Remarks

Derezeytse 12,000 tons yearly throughput capacity (1938). SDS #2004, Mar. ’41.

Hubieze 20,000 tons yearly throughput capacity (1938). Formerly known as
“Hubicka Raffinerya Nafty.” SDS #2004, Mar. ’41.

Kherson Stock for cracking plant is distillate from Tuapse and Grozny. World
Oil Atlas gives cracking capacity as 225,000 tons yearly. Cracking plant
reported moved to Syzran but may have been rebuilt and is carried as
such. SDS #2028, 2562, 2025, 2317. Ltr., PAW to ONI, ONI 408-1000,
1944-45.

Mariupol Benzol plant reported put into operation in 1946. “Krasnaya Zveszda”,
29 Sept. ’46,

Osipenko 200,000 tons yearly throughput, 180,000 tons cracking capacity. SDS
#2317, 2004. CIA FDB, Source #2038.

Chalowka Damaged refinery, 180 km E of Poltava. Reconstruction began in Mar.
°45. USFA #70, 23 July °48.

Ordzhonikidze Supplied by pipeline (35-40 cm dia.) from pumping station 10 km SE

ECONOMIC REGION:

Plant Location
Amavir

of plant. Five-million-liter capacity storage facilities. AF 234, Rpt
31-1019, 5 Apr. ’49.

SOUTHEAST

Remarks

200,000 tons yearly throughput capacity. Plant reported under con-
struction by several sources since 1941. This is likely since location is
the terminus of pipeline from Tuapse and Grozny, continuing north tc
other points. NA, London, Rpt #:A-724-42, 22 Sept. ’42. Wkly Intel. Rpt
#159, 18 Sept. ’42.
Page-56
*

ECONOMIC REGION:

Mirzaani

ECONOMIC REGION:
Buguruslan

Molotov

Kurgan

Oktyabrsk

ECONOMIC REGION:
Novokazalinsk

Andizhan

ECONOMIC REGION:
Sukhovskaya

TOR CRET 53

TRANSCAUCASUS

250,000 tons yearly throughput capacity. 150,000 tons yearly cracking
capacity. Under expansion, completed in 1943 with modern cracking
installation. SDS +2025, 552, 2002 (1944).

URALS

500,000-900,000 tons yearly throughput capacity planned in 1939, under
construction in 1943. SDS #2002, (1944). ID 5879, 15 Aug. ’47 (info
dated Oct. ’44). SDS #2578, 29 Apr. ’43.

800,000 tons yearly throughput capacity. Under construction since 1939
and continuing through 1947. Cracking plant presumed to have come
from Osipenko, AF 156, Rpt #1083, 30 Mar. ’49.

500,000 tons yearly throughput capacity. Topping plant planned.
Started operation in 1945-46, aviation and motor fuel production.
Refinery under construction. AAF 165, 7827/30, MIS 689 (4511) Jan "49.
ECIC/23/304 (7869) July ’48. ECIC/50/20 (2634), Oct. *48.

CENTRAL ASIA

Produces high-octane avgas. Administered by Soviet Air Ministry.
USFA #73, 3 Sept. ’48.

500,000 tons yearly throughput capacity. Production of naphtha at the
plant is being increased. SDS #2028, 2317, Mar. ’42. “Pravda Vostoka”,
19 Oct. 46. Eco. Bulletin #31, 5 Aug. 48.

FAR EAST
Being constructed. WDGS Rpt #TB-871, #3008.

pppetteer
Page-57
MAY 5 15 09

195

 

GPO~State Serv.—30-4595