
Page-1
copy NC.g8‘
FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR

aa

Al FOR REPORTS AND ESTLHATES
veel” —, CIA
: fier

APPENDICES TO ORE 58.48

“The Strategic Value to the USSR of the Conquest
of Western Europe and the Near East
(to Cairo) prior to 1950.”

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

 

  
 
  

ORE 58-48 (Appendices)
Do

Published 27 October 1948 >

  

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

330030
Page-2
TOP S#CRET

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

pao e

~

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council

National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Commitice
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board

TOP SWCRET
Page-3
roe péften

APPENDICES TO ORE 58-48
TABLE OF CONTENTS

ECONOMICS APPENDIX

I. CONCLUSIONS .. 7 : 7 : . : : : : » 35

II. DISCUSSION
1. Raw Material Requirements and Natural Resources . : : . : qT
2. Food and Agricultural Resources and Requirements . : : . : 12
3. Manpower . . : . : > : . . . 15
4. Machinery Industries . : . : . . 5 . : . . 15
5. Production of Munitions . : ‘ . : 7 : : . : 16
6. Production of Aircraft . : . . : 7 : : . . 1T
7. Economic Organization and Control : : : : . . : : 17
8. Transportation . : : : . . : : . : + . 18

SCIENTIFIC APPENDIX
I. CONCLUSIONS 7 . . : : : . . . . . » 21-25
II. DETAILED BREAKDOWN

1. Atomic Energy . . : . . . . . . . . . 25
2. Biological Warfare. : : : : : . : . : . 26
3. Chemical Warfare. : : : : : : . 7 : . 26
4. Electronics . : : : . : : : : : 7 : : 28
5. Guided Missiles . : : : : io : . 7 : : 28
6. Aircraft : : : : : : ; : : : : . : 30
7. Naval Weapons . : . . : i : : . : . : 31
8. Miscellaneous. : 7 : : 7 : : . : : : 31
9. Personnel . : . 7 : : : . : . : . . 35

POLITICAL APPENDIX
I. CONCLUSIONS : . 7 : : : : : : : . : 39
II. DISCUSSION

1. Outline of Political Considerations Influencing a Soviet Decision to Over-
run Western Europe and the Near East before January 1, 1950 . . 39
2. Probable Soviet Analysis of the Political Considerations Outlined Above . 41

roger
Page-4
FOREWORD

The appendices here issued constitute three of the four subcommittee reports on
which ORE 58-48 was based. In general each subcommittee has analyzed and evalu-
ated, within its own sphere of interest and in terms of the assumptions stated for ORE
58-48, the advantages and disadvantages for the USSR of the presumed operation. The
economic, scientific, and military subcommittees have worked by adding the potential
of the conquered areas to that of the USSR without taking intangible factors and war
damage into account. This was considered to be a valid procedure since it was under-
stood that the intangibles would be given proper weight in the final synthesis of the
subcommittees’ findings. ORE 58-48 was this synthesis.

The report of the military subcommittee has not been included in these appendices
because the material in that report has since been somewhat modified and has appeared
in various papers prepared for high-level planning purposes.

1 voy feces
Page-5
APPENDICES TO ORE 58-48

“The Strategic Value to the USSR of the Conquest
of Western Europe and the Near East
(to Cairo) prior to 1950.”

ECONOMICS APPENDIX

This appendix deals with the economic facts of the situation in the Soviet Union,
in Eastern and Western Europe, and in the Near East, and the analysis of the economic
advantages and disadvantages to the Soviet Union in the occupation of Western Europe
and the Near East (to Cairo) by Soviet military forces. This appendix includes, how-
ever, only those aspects of the problem which have particular bearing upon the decision
which the USSR might make with respect to such possible action and does not purport
to be a complete analysis of the economic situation in these areas.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The occupation of Western and Northern Europe and the Near East by Soviet forces
could yield to the USSR a number of great long-range economic advantages which
undoubtedly are recognized by the Soviet leaders. The principal gains would accrue
to the USSR, however, only if the Soviet Union and the entire area under its control
were relatively free from damaging attack and if commercial intercourse were possible
with the rest of the world. The most important of these economic advantages would
be the following:

a. The control and utilization of technical skills (including engineering, mechan-
ical, managerial) and the extensive industrial facilities of Western and Northern Eu-
Tope. Occupation of that area would more than double the technically skilled man-
power under the control of the Soviet Union.

b. Increased availability and facilities for the production of precision and special
purpose machine tools, precision gauges, large castings and forgings, and other ma-
chinery; the Soviet Union is relatively deficient in these essentials.

¢. Acquisition of an iron and steel industry now producing at a higher rate than
that of the USSR and which, therefore, would considerably strengthen the Soviet
economy.

d. Some additions to the production of finished arms, ammunition, and aircraft.
At present, however, the production of these items in Western and Northern Europe is
relatively small compared to that of the Soviet Union; the principal immediate asset
would be the acquisition by the USSR of manpower skilled in the techniques of modern
weapons production.

2. After an extended period of peacetime control, occupation of Western and Northern
Europe could greatly accelerate the industrialization of the Soviet Union. Following

NOTE: These Sub-committee reports, on which CIA 58-48 was based, represent agreed conclusions
of the working-level representatives of the intelligence organizations of the Departments
of State, Army, Navy, Air Force, and CLA. They have not been submitted to the Directors
of these organizations for formal concurrence or dissent.

3 TOYSECRET
Page-6
TOP FECRET

a preliminary organizing period, the gains to the Soviet Union would mount and could
eventually result in an economic unit of tremendous power.

3. It is not impossible that within a period of about ten years the joint economic power
(as indicated in the following sections) of the USSR, the Satellites, and the occupied
areas would equal that of the United States. Thereafter, the economic superiority
of such a consolidation over the United States would become proportionately greater,
with each successive year, in skilled as well as total manpower, in industrial capacity,
and in the adequacy and self-sufficiency of the area with respect to natural resources.

4. If, however, instead of a negotiated peace, there is continuing global war between
the USSR and the United States and its allies, occupation of the European continent
and the Near East would have important economic disadvantages which undoubtedly
are also recognized by the Soviet leaders.

5. The principal disadvantages (or handicaps to exploitation), quite apart from
destruction by military attack or sabotage, are the following:

a. Loss to the Soviet-controlled area of imports of certain strategic materials, par-
ticularly natural rubber and tin and other non-ferrous metals. These things would not
be available in quantities within the area adequate to maintain full-scale industrial
activity (and presumably would be denied to that area by virtue of sea and land block-
ade), although shortages of certain materials could be mitigated by the use of sub-
stitutes, synthetics, and new industrial techniques. Oil, even if adequate in quantity
at the source in the Near and Middle East, would be in extremely short supply at con-
suming points in Western and Northern Europe because of transportation difficulties.

b. The difficulty and cost in manpower of establishing effective governmental and
economic control over the occupied area.

c. Interference with Mediterranean and Atlantic coastal shipping under the con-
trol of the USSR.

d. Western and Northern European deficits in agricultural products, such as grains,
fats and oils*, and textile fibers would have to be made up in part by shipments from
Eastern Europe where little “surplus” is available; in any event, diets in Western and
Northern Europe would have to be reduced below current low levels for large segments
of the population.

e. The extensive destruction of customary channels of trade, established sources of
supply, and traditional industrial relationships would further reduce Soviet ability to
make effective utilization of the resources, manpower, and industrial capacity acquired
in Western Europe.

6. These economic disadvantages consequent to occupation under conditions of global
war would prevent the USSR from utilizing fully the potential economic advantages
of occupation. Transportation difficulties, deficiencies in certain strategic materials,
and problems of organization and management would reduce the output of steel and
steel mill products, machine tools and other machinery, electronics apparatus, pre-
cision instruments, and other items which the USSR would need from Western Europe.
In addition, the productivity of labor would be considerably reduced as a result of

* Estimates of fats and oils are not included in the Appendix attached hereto.

TOPAECRET 4
Page-7
roy gether

increased sabotage and the probable low morale of the populations in the occupied areas.
‘7. The occupation of Continental Europe and the Near East, in fact, would not yield
immediate economic support to the Soviet Union for a much greater military effort
than the Soviets alone could mount at the present time. This arises from the fact that
the productive facilities of Western and Northern Europe, as a whole, have not entirely
recovered from the destructive effects of the last war; they are not now engaged in, nor
could they be readily converted to, production of naval ships, long-range aircraft, certain
types of communications equipment and other types of military supplies in which the
Soviet Union is deficient for global war. Conversion of facilities to war production,
furthermore, would also be hampered under conditions of global war by the damaging
attacks to which plant installations would be subjected.

In the event, however, that a period of a year to 18 months elapses before a strong
counter-attack can be launched by the United States against the USSR and the areas
then under occupation, the Soviets would have time to reorganize Western European
production sufficiently to obtain considerable quantities of strategically important
industrial products. The acquisition of the industrial plant, equipment, and technical
skills of Western Europe would yield under such circumstances substantial wartime
economic support to the Soviet Union.

5 TOP SECRET
Page-8
roy picnex

DISCUSSION

1. Raw MareriaL REQUIREMENTS AND NATURAL RESOURCES.
a. Coal.

In the USSR the peak annual coal supply during World War II was only 108
million tons, or a little more than half the anticipated 1949 output, Although Soviet
requirements have increased since that time, primarily as a result of the expansion of
industries and transport, the USSR proper is expected to be self-sufficient in coal. The
remainder of Continental Europe is not ordinarily self-sufficient in coal, as the United
Kingdom has supplemented this area's supplies in previous years. In the event of
Soviet conquest, however, those industrial, transportation, and space-heating require-
ments essential to military occupation in Continental Europe probably could be met
without recourse to coal supplies from other areas.

b. Petroleum.

Soviet crude oil output in 1949 will probably reach 32 million metric tons. This
is only slightly in excess of prewar output, but considerably above the Soviet peak
annual supply during World War II (including lend-lease aid), which reached about
22.5 million tons in 1942. It is likely, however, that the peak wartime supply could
not have met minimum needs of the Soviet economy without substantial withdrawals
from stocks, whereas the probable depletion of stocks during the war and the tight
petroleum situation in the postwar period suggest that present stocks are small.
Despite augmented production, analysis of projected Soviet requirements in 1949 sug-
gest a tight over-all supply of crude oil. Under wartime conditions, moreover, a severe
shortage of light fractions required for the operation of the Soviet air force is also
indicated.

Only a small surplus of petroleum will be available from the Soviet orbit in 1949.
Output of crude and synthetic oil in Eastern Europe (including Eastern Austria) will
amount to about 6 million tons, roughly two-thirds of which will be consumed in that
area, The Asiatic orbit, on the other hand, will be completely dependent on the USSR
for its minimum needs, which are, to be sure, negligible.

Western Europe, although adequately supplied with refining facilities, will pro-
duce only about 2-million tons of crude and synthetic oil in 1949. Present consumption
in this area is at the rate of about 30 million tons per annum, but if maximum conversion
to coal were effected and if Western European industry were utilized only to about 70
percent of capacity, requirements might be cut back to 9 million tons annually. This
would leave a deficit of 7 million tons.

The availability of Near and Middle Eastern oil to meet the European oil deficit
is extremely uncertain, even if the Soviet Union should seize intact the oil wells and
pipelines in this region. In the absence of destruction, this area (including Iraq, Iran,
and Saudi Arabia) will produce in 1949 at the annual rate of 50 million tons, but trans-
portation facilities, under the most favorable of circumstances, probably would not

1 royflfcnes

Cp.¥ blank)
Page-9
vox phen

permit the shipment of more than 9 million tons. It *has been assumed, however, that
a large part of the oil facilities and installations in the Near and Middle East would be
seriously damaged or destroyed prior to evacuation by the present operators. Depend-
ing on the extent and type of damage and destruction, therefore, the availability of oil
from this area to supply European needs would probably be less than the low limits set
by transportation difficulties, and, conceivably, could even be virtually nil.

This analysis indicates that the prospective over-all petroleum supply of the
USSR and its Eastern European orbit would be barely adequate to meet the wartime
requirements of these areas, provided non-essential consumption would be reduced to
aminimum. Bottlenecks would be likely to occur in the production of aviation fuel.
In Western Europe under Soviet occupation, it would be extremely difficult to supply
minimum requirements. Even if as much as 9 million tons were available in, and
could be transported from, the Near and Middle East, it would not be sufficient for full-
scale utilization of the Western European industrial capacity, nor for any substantial
Western European contributions to mechanized warfare. In the longer run, solution
of petroleum stringencies would, of course, depend on increased output in the Soviet-
controlled area and solution of transportation difficulties.

ESTIMATED OUTPUT AND CONSUMPTION OF CRUDE AND SYNTHETIC OIL IN
THE USSR, EUROPEAN ORBIT, AND WESTERN EUROPE, 1949
UNDER PROJECT 50 ASSUMPTIONS

(In millions of metric tons)

o> Probable Estimated
Output Consumption

USSR 32 36
European Orbit, 6 4
Western Europe 2 9

Total 40 49
Import Availabilities

from Near East 9
c. Crude Steel.

The USSR is now producing crude steel at an estimated annual rate of 18.5
million metric tons, or approximately 4 million tons more than its peak wartime supply.
In 1944 the USSR consumed an estimated 8.5 million tons of crude steel in the manu-
facture of principal military end-items — e.g. ammunition, tanks, guns, aircraft, and
trucks. Other direct military consumption (e.g. for submarines, fortifications, etc.) is
unknown; consumption of steel for maintenance of essential industry, construction and
equipment of war plants, and reconstruction of damaged installations is also unknown.
Not more than 1.5 million tons, however, were available for these purposes from domestic
output, and the raw steel equivalent of machinery and equipment received under lend-
lease was not more than 4.5 million tons. Hence, maximum wartime annual consump-
tion may be taken at roughly 14.5 million tons. Essential steel requirements of Soviet
industry now, however, may be expected to exceed those of World War II.

TOP § 8
Page-10
nor plas

Western Europe (not including the United Kingdom) and the satellite couptries
in Eastern Europe are now producing crude steel at an annual rate of about $0 nillion
metric tons, of which RAS ullion tons is being produced in Western Europe (in-
cluding western Germany). The combined rate of output of these areas amounts to
about sraiion tons less than the peak wartime output of the European Axis, and
should be sufficient to sustain a war effort nearly comparable to that of the Axis in
World War II.

Altogether, the area assumed to be wate control now is Produging crude
steel at an annual rate of approximately 465 ion metric tons, or aboutst million tons
more than the peak wartime supply of the Axis powers and the USSR combined. This
steel capacity would, in itself, be sufficient to sustain a war effort somewhat greater than
the World War II effort of Germany and the USSR combined.

ESTIMATE (MID-1948) OF OUTPUT OF CRUDE STEEL IN THE USSR,
EUROPEAN ORBIT, AND WESTERN EUROPE

(In millions of metric tons)

USSR 18.5
European Orbit 5.6
Western-Germany 5
Western Europe (including western Germany) 23.1
Total BRO
LA,

d. Crude and Synthetic Rubber.

Although available data indicate that there will be more rubber available in the
USSR in 1949 than the maximum amount consumed in the Second World War, it is
likely that rubber would be a bottleneck in the event the Soviets move into Western
Europe and the Middle East. The orbit and areas assumed to be brought under Soviet
domination produce no natural or synthetic rubber. Synthetic production in Ger-
many, now confined to the Soviet Zone, is not expected to exceed 15 percent of the
German wartime peak. The new rubber supply (synthetic and Soviet reclaimed and
natural only) for the area as a whole will be approximately equal to the maximum
wartime supply of Germany and the USSR combined; but requirements of the area
under Soviet occupation would probably be substantially higher than during World
War II. In addition, the short supply of natural rubber in the area would tend ‘to
ageravate the over-all deficiency.

e. Aluminum.

During the war years, 1941-45, USSR production of aluminum, including pri-
mary and secondary, amounted to about two-thirds of Soviet consumption with the
remainder supplied by imports. This does not include aluminum imported in finished
products, such as airplanes, which accounted for an important share of Soviet require-
ments: The 1946 rate of production, however, is expected to exceed the average annual
rate of consumption during World War II.

9 roy pees
Page-11
TOP, ‘CRET

‘The satellite countries are not expected to meet their total requirements in 1949
under peacetime conditions, falling short by several thousand tons.

Western Europe is expected to produce about 200,000 tons of aluminum in
1949, which is less than half the annual rate of production of Axis Europe during World
War II. Capacity of Western Europe has been reduced by dismantling of German
plants, two of which have been shipped to the USSR.

If the USSR dominates Europe and the Far East in 1949, about 450,000 tons of
aluminum will be produced in that area, of which 350,000 tons could be consumed for
direct wartime use, a sufficient tonnage for full-scale military operations.

Although some Western European plants depend on the Western Hemisphere
for bauxite, Europe and the USSR could readily become independent of outside sources
since Hungary has the world’s largest bauxite deposits, and France, Yugoslavia, and
Greece can supply substantial tonnages.

ESTIMATED OUTPUT AND REQUIREMENTS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
ALUMINUM IN THE USSR, ORBIT COUNTRIES, AND WESTERN EUROPE, 1949

(In thousands of metric tons)

Estimated Estimated
Output Requirements
USSR 220 220°
Orbit Countries

1. European orbit 20 40
2. Far East 10 10
Western Europe 200 180
Total 450 450

‘USSR — fabricating facilities limited.

4. Copper.

During the war the USSR produced as much as 160,000 metric tons of primary
copper annually, with secondary metal amounting to 30,000 tons. Since consumption
exceeded 310,000 tons annually, large amounts had to be imported to meet war needs.
The production of copper in 1949 is expected to reach 260,000 tons (total secondary and
primary), which will fall short of Soviet consumption in World War I.

The satellite countries are expected to produce about 100,000 tons in 1949, or
enough to meet their estimated peacetime requirements in that year. Western Europe’s
requirements in 1949 will exceed its production by more than 200,000 tons. In 1949 the
total output of areas assumed to be under Soviet control would be about 520,000 tons,
which would not be sufficient by far to supply the total requirements of the area as a
whole, Assuming that the needs of the USSR were first supplied, however, the tonnage
available to the remainder of the area would about equal the average annual copper
supply of Axis Europe in World War I.

royfbscrst 10
Page-12
rogers

ESTIMATED OUTPUT AND REQUIREMENTS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
COPPER IN THE USSR AND AREAS UNDER ITS CONTROL, 1949

(In thousands of metric tons)

Probable Estimated
Output Requirements
USSR 260 310
Satellite Countries 100 100
Western Europe 160 370
Total 520 "780

g. Lead.

Immediately prior to World War II (1939), the production of primary lead in
the USSR was about 75,000 metric tons; output reached about 125,000 tons in 1943, but
has since then declined. Deficiencies in the Soviet lead supply during the war were
made up by imports from the United Kingdom and the United States through lend-

The total output of lead in the USSR for 1949, including Secondary, has been
estimated at 150,000 metric tons, falling short of probable requirements in that year
by 20,000 tons.

‘The production of lead from the satellite countries has been estimated at 80,000

requirements of lead for the year 1949, 310,000 metric tons, would far exceed estimated
production of 170,000 tons. Including all areas then, an estimated deficiency of
approximately 130,000 metric tons is indicated.

ESTIMATED OUTPUT AND REQUIREMENTS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
LEAD IN THE USSR, THE EUROPEAN ORBIT, AND WESTERN EUROPE, 1949

(In thousands of metric tons)

Estimated Estimated
Output Requirements
USSR 150 ; 170
European Orbit 80 50
Western Europe 170 310
Total 400 530

h. Zine.

The production of primary zinc in the USSR for the year 1939 was 85,000 metric
tons; about 90,000 tons were Produced in 1943. Prewar information indicated that
independence from imports had about been achieved, but during the war 30,000 to
40,000 tons per year were imported, principally from the United States and the United
Kingdom. . .
Page-13
ror ops

The total output of zinc, both primary and secondary, in the USSR for the year
1949 has been estimated at 135,000 metric tons and requirements at 155,000 tons.

“It is estimated that the production of zinc in the satellite countries in 1949 will
be about 130,000 metric tons and, under peacetime conditions requirements will be
78,000 tons, or an excess of output over requirements of 55,000 tons. The combined
output of the USSR and satellite countries in 1949 is estimated at 265,000 tons and
requirements at 230,000 tons, indicating an excess in output of 35,000 metric tons.

The estimated output of zinc in 1949 for the rest of Europe is 175,000 metric
tons and requirements 270,000 tons, or a deficiency of 95,000 tons. Including all areas,
the estimates indicate a deficiency of 60,000 metric tons.

THE ESTIMATED OUTPUT AND REQUIREMENTS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
ZINC IN THE USSR, THE EUROPEAN ORBIT, AND WESTERN EUROPE, 1949

(In thousands of metric tons)

Estimated Estimated
Output Requirements
USSR : 135 "155
European Orbit 130 15
Western Europe 175 270
Total 440 500

i. Tin.

‘The present annual production of tin in the USSR is estimated at 7,500 metric
tons; output in 1949 is estimated at about 8,000 tons, which will fall far short of require-
ments. The deficiency in USSR in 1949 would have to be met by imports through
smuggling, or otherwise, from the Far East, for the total amount of tin available from
the satellite countries as well as from the rest of Europe would be insufficient to fill
all essential needs of the Soviet Union. Moreover, the tin requirements of Western
Europe alone in 1949 would be greater than the combined production of all three areas.

2. Foop anp AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES AND REQUIREMENTS.

If the area under domination of the Soviet Union should be extended to include
Western and Northern Europe (excluding the United Kingdom) and the Middle East,
indigenous production of food within the entire area would not be sufficient to feed the
working population at levels which would permit normal industrial output and at the
same time prevent widespread malnutrition among the remaining population.

Before the war, the average net import requirement of this area for bread grains
and other grains combined was 8.3 million metric tons. During the consumption year
1 July 1947 to 30 June 1948, net imports into the area as a whole are estimated at 21.4
million metric tons, because of low production in some areas. With improved crop
conditions generally, the 1948-49 import requirements have been forecast at 14.3 million
metric tons. Assuming progressive economic recovery (including recovery in agricul-
ture) in Western Europe, the net import requirement for 1949-50 is estimated at 11.6
million tons and for 1950-51 at 10.6 million metric tons.

rox power 12
Page-14
TOP go

In prewar years the Soviet Union, the satellite countries and the Soviet Zone of
Germany together Produced an export surplus of grains, which averaged 5.6 million
metric tons. Because of Poor crops in the satellite countries the grain surplus of this
area was reduced to 1.2 million tons during 1947-48, During 1948-49, because of favor-
able weather and increased acreages, the grain surplus may increase to 2.6 million tons.
During 1949-50 and 1950-51 the surplus production is expected to improve further to
possibly 4.5 million metric tons.

Both western Germany and Austria were, before the war, grain deficit areas. If
the Soviet Union, the satellite countries, and all of Germany and Austria are considered
as a unit area, the prewar situation was one of surplus production with a net export of
1.2 million metric tons. In 1947-48, on the other hand, this area had a net import
requirement of 4.7 miilion tons. Although crop prospects have improved in some of
the Satellites and western Germany, the 1948-49 net import requirement for this area
is expected tobe 3.8 million tons. By 1949-50 the import requirement is expected to be
reduced to 1.5 million tons and by 1950-51 to 1.1 million metric tons.

If the Soviet Union and all of Continental Europe are considered as a unit area,
the prewar import requirements averaged 8.9 million metric tons. In 1947-48 the im-
port requirement was increased to 21.2 million metric tons because of low production in
the Satellites and Western Europe. The Soviet production in 1948 is about the same
as in 1947, but the quality of the crop is poorer. In the Satellites and particularly in
Western Europe, however, the grain harvests are better than those of the previous year,
so that the net import requirement of Continental Europe and the Soviet Union com-
bined for 1948-49 is expected to be around 14.0 million metric tons. In 1949-50 net
grain import requirements are estimated at 11.8 million metric tons and, in 1950-51, at
10.9 million metric tons. The above estimates assume continued increases in grain
production which, with average weather conditions and improved farm techniques, are
expected to take place on the European Continent. If the Soviet Union gained control
of Western Europe by military action, however, grain and other food production would
probably be substantially below the above estimates, This would increase the net
deficit of the area correspondingly.

The Middle East, including Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, Iraq, Iran, and
Egypt, was an area of surplus grain production before the war with average net exports
of 0.6 million metric tons. In 1948-49 imports into the area are estimated at 0.4 million
tons, but in 1949-50 the Middle East is expected to be again on a net export basis with
estimated combined shipments of 0.15 million tons in that year and 0.3 million metric
tons in 1950-51.

A summary of estimated grain production and trade, by the various unit areas
indicated above, is shown in the table below. Similar over-all deficiencies would exist
for other foods and for textile fibers.

From a long-range point of view the Soviet Union proper would make significant
gains in the field of agricultural technology if Western Europe were brought under
Soviet domination, Provided the cooperation, of the technologists involved could be

obtained.

13
Page-15
fen

TOP

"S¥6I YSNBNY ¢ JO SB Pafjdwioo Bed :3j}0N
‘aiqissod JoaauayM syseq YBNI 04 pazBMoyed ‘ao]J SAPNIOUT
“syioduny seqeoypuy (+) snid ‘syrodxe sayvoypul (—) snus

*(Ge6I-FEBT IBIA IvpUaTBd) SBA OTPPI PUY (SE6T IVaAPTU 03 PEST

qeakpyw) AuBWIeD JO BUOZ YajAog puw AuBUIIED Joy ydaoxa ‘LET Teakpywd 0} Ect JeaApyur jo sadesoaw [ENUUY y

 

 

 

 

gort Oela oTI+ F00e obit rest viet PoLT eet SUes
ez +. Lye wet Tee se + oeL set ots eet VZot
ub + eet yet Var s6 + OOIT gort 86 get VOst
eort Sb6T Stit Leer ett SILT i+ TS8st est £902
re + yoe eet roe “yt TOL re + cel egt ee
gL + Yeor get gcoT wet Lot rett Ors get OCT
Tr +  Lovt Gt + gost set Teer Let Veet ZI— FS LST
Lo— Fed Oot — oes go+ ¥0S v0 —- 09S go- stb
Bt t ree sot BBL cet LLL eg + reo L0— use
Sy — = SFeT yy — = FST 9% — FEIT ttT— Ott gs— OSH
£t— Tes ee—- ves er-— Ley so— ers g%— = SD
cs LoL To — OeL cl Ten yo seo oe— T6L
suo oL2aW {0 SUOHILA
apelL uoj} ape —Uoj}. apelL  uoTy apulL u0y} eperL = Uory
qeN  -onpord 4eN  -onpolg WN  -onpolg aN —- -oNPOId e79N  -ONPOId
TS-0S6T 09-6F6T 6y-8h6T 8¥-L¥6T rIVMaIg

SUTeID BIOL
sSUIBID 1010
suyeIN praig
seq aTPpHW pus ‘edomy
TequaUTIUOD ‘UOTUN 4aJA0g

sUyBIH [BIOL
+ SUpBID JeyIO
suTeip peaig
edomy eyuaUuyyu0D
pus TOTUA 4aTAOS

sUpEIH [BIOL
sSuTeID J9UIO
suwip prog
AuBWUIEDH TTB pus BIysny
‘soqTioveg ‘WOTUA TAOS

SUTLID 1BIOL
+SUTBIN J8U3IO
SUTBIN pwg
euoz JajAOg UBUTIEH pus
‘gaqmayes ‘UoyUN 4@}AOS

 

{0S-6461 HOA SHIONVLOACKE ‘sh-L¥6T WOR SAL’
QPeI ATAL 1 UVAA UOS SNOILVWIXOUddV ‘“SVEUV

“‘SUDVUTAV UVAMANd HLLM ANV TS-0S6T

 

WALLSH HLM CHUVINOO 661 ANN 0€ HONOUHL
GgL0das JO FAVUL LAN ANV NOLLONGOUd :NIVUO

14

royflconsn
Page-16
royflfenet

From a short-time point of view, however, the extension of Soviet control to Western
Europe by military action would probably result in a reduction of indigenous farm
products made available for non-farm consumption and, with a shutting off of imports
from overseas, the shortage of food in urban areas would be even greater than has pre-
vailed since the end of World War II assuming comparable weather conditions.

3. MANPOWER.

The total Soviet labor force at the beginning of 1948 is estimated to have been
quantitatively somewhat weaker than it was at the beginning of World War II, but con-
siderably stronger than during the war. It is difficult to make even such general com-
ments about the qualitative strength of the current labor force. During and since the
war, considerable numbers of workers have acquired important skills, thus making the
labor force, on the average, more highly skilled than in 1941. Nevertheless, in part,
because of the magnitude of the present programs of reconstruction and industrial ex-
pansion, the Soviet economy at present is believed to be hampered by shortages of
skilled workers.

Under Soviet control of the European continent, any labor shortages of the USSR,
especially shortages of skilled workers, could probably be met by moving workers from
the Soviet orbit, and certainly from the conquered area, particularly Western Europe.
The highly industrialized countries of Western Europe are obviously potential sources
of any types of industrial labor in which the USSR is deficient. Occupation of Western
Europe alone would more than double the technically skilled manpower — engineering,
mechanical, managerial — available to the Soviet Union. Specifically, it would in-
crease the nonagricultural labor force under direct Soviet control from approximately
32 millions to 84 millions, compared to about 50 millions in the United States (see table
below). While Western Europe and Eastern Europe are capable of supplementing the
Soviet labor force so as to insure peak war production, Soviet exploitation of their
economies, on the other hand, may encounter shortages of skilled manpower in certain
key industries such as coal, steel, and engineering, even at a reduced level of output.

ESTIMATED LABOR FORCE OF THE USSR, WESTERN EUROPE,
AND UNITED STATES, JANUARY 1948
(In millions of laborers)

TOTAL
LABOR AGRICULTURAL NON-AGRICULTURAL
AREA FORCE LABOR FORCE LABOR FORCE
USSR 83.5 52.0 31.5
Western Europe
(including Trizonia) 85.9 33.1 52.8
Total ° 169.4 85.1 84.3
United States 57.1 71 ‘50.0

4. Macuinery InpusTRIEs.

Since the USSR was able to conduct warfare on the scale of the Second World War .
with a plant and equipment inventory greatly weakened by German destruction and

15 rgfhecrn
Page-17
TOP fos

occupation, it certainly could now produce sufficient military equipment to maintain
a comparable level of military activity. Current Soviet machine-building capacity
exceeds the 1940 level by a substantial margin. By the summer of 1947, the prewar
production levels for almost all items of equipment had been reached or exceeded by
Soviet industry; since then there has been a steady rise in output. In terms of machine
capacity only, therefore, the Soviet Union is capable of exceeding its World War II
performance. Despite this comparatively strong position, however, some machinery
and equipment, such as precision instruments, automatic machine tools, high-produc-
tion precision machine tools, and equipment for the manufacture of high octane gaso-
line, are currently in relatively short supply in the USSR.

The absorption of the Near East by the USSR would offer very few, if any, additions
to the metal-working capacity of the Soviet economy. Moreover, under the assumption
that a large part of the oil facilities and installations in the Near East would be seriously
damaged or destroyed prior to evacuation by the present operators, this area would
constitute a drain on the Soviet machine-building industries, if the Near East oil fields
were to be restored.

Control of Eastern and Western Europe, particularly the latter, would materially
augment Soviet capacity to construct machinery. In addition, European facilities for
the production of various specific types of equipment such as those in short supply in
the USSR at present, would relieve a current Soviet deficiency. As a result of the added
capacity, the machine-building potential of the Soviet-controlled area would approach
the combined Soviet and Axis potential of World War Il. Consideration has not been
given, however, to such factors as raw material supply, skilled labor, and transportation;
these factors, throughout all areas, are likely to be more limiting than the plant capacity
to produce.

5. PRODUCTION OF MUNITIONS.

Seizure and exploitation of the armaments industries of Eastern and Western
Europe would add materially to Soviet military potentialities. Of immediate signifi-
cance to Soviet capabilities are the munitions industries of the satellite countries of
Eastern Europe. Some of these industries have already been converted to production
of Soviet munitions, apparently with the objective of eventual standardization of ground
force weapons within the Soviet bloc. The complete integration of Czechoslovakian,
Polish, Hungarian, and Rumanian industries with that of the USSR would provide a
very significant addition to Soviet capacity; the other satellite countries, however, pos-
sess small and relatively undeveloped industries, generally capable of producing only
weapons parts and ammunition in limited quantities.

The principal immediate asset to be derived from Soviet acquisition of the countries
of Western Europe would be the large reservoir of manpower skilled in the techniques of
modern weapons production. The potential value of the munitions industries them-
selves to the Soviets are great, but their present lack of capacity resulting from wartime
losses, and deficiencies in supply of basic raw materials would tend to limit their effec-
tiveness for Soviet production plans until after 1950.

er 16
Page-18
TOP » focssr

The USSR is estimated to have immediate production capabilities of about 4,900 jet
aircraft per year, of which all but 120 are fighters, and 16,700 conventional aircraft, or a
total capability of 21,600 aircraft. By the last quarter of 1949, the USSR will have
estimated production capabilities of about 15,800 jet aircraft per year, of which all but
about 540 will be fighters, and 41,500 conventional aircraft, or a total capability of about
57,300 aircraft annually. No foreseeable bottlenecks would prevent the attainment of
the above programs.

During 1947 aircraft production in Europe, except for the United Kingdom and the
USSR, approximated 2,000 aircraft of both civil and military types (excluding gliders).
The more important producers were France, Czechoslovakia, Sweden, Denmark, Switzer-
land, Italy, the Netherlands, Turkey, Poland, and Belgium; output in the remaining
European countries was negligible. Jet aircraft production was largely in the design
and experimental stage. Only a few prototypes were constructed. In 1948 it is esti-
mated that aircraft production will reach 2,500 airframes with small series construction
of jet aircraft in France and Sweden. Stimulated by the political deterioration of the
situation in Europe, it is predicted that output levels may reach 3,500 aircraft in 1949
and 5,500 in 1950, provided Soviet domination is not previously extended over the
entire area.

If the USSR gains control of Europe, it is estimated that the Soviets will have
acquired aircraft productive facilities having a combined optimum output of 24,000 civil
and military aircraft per year. Under conditions of occupation, however, actual output
is expected to be far from optimum. It is doubtful if the Soviets could push production
beyond 15,000 aircraft per year prior to 1950. About two-fifths of this 15,000 figure
would be produced by countries already behind the iron curtain. This estimate ex-
cludes the productive facilities of Germany, Austria, and other occupied countries which
have already been largely integrated into the aircraft industry of the USSR.

In summary, within the USSR and those European countries now under Soviet
control, taken together, it is possible that aircraft production could be stepped up to
an annual rate of 23,000 - 24,000 within six weeks' time. By 1950 this figure could be
increased to 63,000 - 64,009 aircraft annually. If the Soviets should gain control of the
entire European continent in the immediate future, the 1950 rate of production could
be on the order of 73,000 - 75,000 aircraft per year.

6. PRODUCTION OF AIRCRAFT.

7. ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION AND CONTROL.

In the event of Soviet occupation of Western Europe, it is expected that the eco-
nomic administration of these countries will, insofar as possible, be in the hands of
native Communist regimes rather than under direct Soviet military or civil control;
effective ultimate control, of course, would be in the hands of the USSR. Preference
for this type of control stems, in part, from the shortage of skilled Soviet personnel for
the direct administration of the countries overrun. In some of the Western European
countries, however, particularly in those without strong Communist groups, economic
administration would probably be under direct Soviet control, although native per-

17 soyfenen
Page-19
TOP Sor

sonnel would still be widely used for intermediate positions. Despite arrangements to
employ native organizational abilities, considerable numbers of Soviet personnel would
be required for the administration of broad controls and for general supervision. The
USSR would not be able to supply sufficient numbers of qualified personnel for these
purposes.

Among others, the following developments would probably take place as a result
of action by the USSR to establish Soviet control over the economies of the countries:

a. Non-collaborators with the Soviet regime would be eliminated from positions of
importance in the economy, including non-collaborators among the management per-
sonnel of at least the more important industrial plants;

b. Communist control of labor unions would be complete, and labor resistance mini-
mized to the fullest extent possible; nevertheless it is believed that certain elements of
the population such as those technically trained would be particularly reluctant to
collaborate;

c. Certain numbers of administrative and managerial personnel would be obtained
from the ranks of Communists, from those willing to join forces with the new regime,
or through effective control over the persons and families of those involved.

The econemic reorganization of the European continent under Soviet occupation
would result in an immediate decline in over-all industrial production, as well as food
deliveries to non-farm areas, largely because of changes in organization and manage-
ment and aversion of the technically trained populace to collaborate fully. Ifthe USSR
should obtain a negotiated peace shortly after occupation of the continent, it is believed
that Soviet organizational and administrative capabilities would be sufficient to cope
with these problems successfully, given a period of years to concentrate on their solution.
If the USSR, on the other hand, should face a continuing global war with the United
States and its allies, the problems of economic organization and control of the European
continent will be of increased magnitude and of a more continuing nature. There
probably would be increased difficulty in dealing with resistance to collaboration, par-
ticularly on the part of technically trained personnel. Under these conditions, the
Soviet Union probably could not cope efficiently with the organizational problems. The
effect of this factor on industrial output cannot be determined in concrete terms; it is
believed, however, that it would be sizeable.

8. TRANSPORTATION.

Under the conditions assumed, the USSR would acquire, particularly in Western
Europe, highly organized rail transportation systems which are closely geared to the
economic structures of the respective nations. The USSR would also improve its over-
all transportation capability by the acquisition of extensive railway equipment-manu-
facturing facilities in which the USSR is notably deficient. The quantities of goods
which land transportations systems would be required to move in the conquered areas
would be slightly less than they are now handling and therefore should present no
serious problem.

By seizing control of the rail systems of the European Continent and Near East, the
USSR would gain internal lines of communication extending to numerous ports on the

roy flscrsr 18
Page-20
roe yeti

Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Persian Gulf, connecting every major port and industria)
region of the conquered areas with the transportation net-work of the Soviet Union.
The USSR would thus acquire a high degree of flexibility for the organized distribution,
in conformity with a comprehensive program, of the combined raw materials and fin-
ished products of the areas between Vladivostok and Gibraltar.

The extensive shipbuilding capacity of Western Europe (at least five times present
Soviet capacity) would permit the USSR rapidly to expand its merchant fleet. Greatly
increased movements of freight between Western European ports and the Black Sea
would be possible at low cost, and increased coastwise shipping would indirectly aug-
ment the capacity of the land transportation systems. Additional quantities of freight
could be shipped from the Black Sea to the Maritime Provinces, which cannot now be
satisfactorily supplied by the Trans-Siberian railroad and the limited amount of ocean
shipping available. Likewise, oil could be moved from the Eastern Mediterranean and
the Persian Gulf to export markets and to Soviet ports.

A specific advantage which would result would be an ability to draw on the im-
mense capacities of warm-water ports throughout Europe to supplement the severely
restricted capacities of ice-bound Soviet ports.

However, under the conditions assumed, the effectiveness of all ports controlled
by the USSR would be sharply reduced. Allied blockades would rapidly eliminate most
of the Soviet overseas trade and would severely restrict the volume of coastwise
shipping. The USSR, therefore, would not be able to exploit fully the advantages of the
extensive shipbuilding capacity in conquered areas.

The foregoing conditions would throw an additional burden on the land transpor-
tation systems. The strategic necessity of relying upon sources of supply east of the
“iron curtain” for a substantial part of the military supplies required in Western Europe
and the Near East would further increase the demands placed on the land transporta-
tion systems.

Although the rail systems of Europe are, in general, on the mend and are capable
of handling present peacetime traffic, and while it is anticipated that the USSR would
attempt to expand capacities, the growing effectiveness of allied counter-action,
plus local sabotage, would rapidly reduce the railway systems of Europe to a condition
in which only the barest industrial and military requirements could be handled. Com-
plete collapse in certain areas could be averted only at excessive cost in labor and
materials.

A particularly weak spot in the Soviet rail transportation system would persist in
the war-damaged, dismantled, and deteriorated rail system in the Soviet Zone of Ger-
many. This system, on the verge of collapse, is handling less than half of its normal
peacetime volume of traffic. There is at the most only one double-track line into Berlin.
Under wartime conditions the system might be organized on the basis of one-way lines,
which could probably handle minimum military requirements for through traffic. The
system would hardly permit the full exploitation of the industrial potential of the area
by the USSR.

Another specific weakness would result from the poor linkage in land transportation
facilities from the USSR to the eastern Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. While

“19 : rogffener
. mt aions du te stronss met
och tun USSR, ond the West uk to
AM erences in Oe uags c?)
Page-21
vor flex

the rail system in this area would support Soviet occupation forces on a moderate scale,
it would not support the requirements of an active defense of any sizeable scale, and

would be particularly vulnerable to Allied counter-action and disruption caused by
the actions of local populations.

TOW SECRET 20
Page-22
roe fener

SCIENTIFIC APPENDIX
CONCLUSIONS

1. Limited strategic advantages in theoretical and applied science and in develop-
ment engineering would be obtained by the USSR in overrunning Western Europe and
the Middle East to Cairo for the first six months to two years of Soviet occupation.
Thereafter, exploitation of the facilities and personnel of the pure and applied scientific
institutions, in highly industrialized Western Europe would, through assimilation into
the scientific and industrial structure of the USSR, begin to have an ever greater bene-
ficial effect upon Soviet war potential, and could increase that potential by as much as
50 percent within five to seven years.

2. In addition to over-all improvement in strategic position, specific phases of
the Soviet military program would be affected toa much greater degree, largely because
the Western European facilities in the scientific field supplement in many instances the
known deficiencies in the Soviet scientific and industrial structure. It is believed that
by overrunning Western Europe in 1948 the probable date by which the USSR will have
exploded its first atomic bomb would be advanced by one to two years ahead of mid-1953.
Production of a significant stockpile of the bombs would be advanced. Research and
design of guided missiles, aircraft, and electronic equipment are other significant
spheres of activity where the acquisition of Western European facilities is believed to be
of particular importance to the USSR. Although the stimulating effect on the general
economy from the European Recovery Plan is expected to accelerate the postwar revitali-
zation of Western European pure and applied science, an early move into Western
Europe by the Soviets would bring a scientific gain for them in advancing their readiness
for war. However, it is believed that the scientific gains would not be a sufficient motive
for a move prior to 1 January 1950.

3. In the Middle East the USSR would acquire no important scientific facilities
or personnel.

4. Should the Soviets overrun Western Europe during 1948 the earliest date that
they may have exploded their first atomic bomb would be advanced three to six months
ahead of mid-1950; the probable date by which the Soviets will have exploded their first
atomic bomb would be advanced from mid-1953 to mid-1951. Should the Soviets wait
until December 1949 to overrun Western Europe, the earliest date that they may have
exploded their first atomic bomb would not be changed substantially; the probable date
by which the Soviets will have exploded their first atomic bomb might be advanced to
mid-1952. Acquisition of the engineering and manufacturing facilities of Western
Europe would double the rate of progress of the Soviet atomic energy program. The
present stockpile of uranium in France, which is equal to 25-50 percent of the present
USSR stockpile, would be an immediate asset.

5. In view of the acute lack in the Soviet industrial structure of engineers, tech-
nicians, and special equipment required to translate scientific knowledge into produc-
tion, the opportunity to acquire these essential factors in certain key industries could be

21 aforcs
Page-23
TOP SECR)

one of the most compelling motives for overrunning Western Europe. The more im-
portant industries are precision equipment, liquid fuels, the metallurgy of high speed
and high temperature ferrous alloys and alloys of light metals, fine chemicals, and
plastics. Many of the engineers and technicians who supervise design, development,
and engineering possess high skill and creativeness which are comparable to the best
technical ability in the US, and are consistent with the highly developed technique of
these industries. The acquisition of the design and development facilities and the
trained personnel of these industries alone would accelerate the Soviet industrial plans
and production in all strategic fields by an estimated 15-30 percent within three years
and the gain would increase with time.

6. Though the electronics industry might properly have been grouped with those
industries discussed in the preceding paragraph, it is sufficiently important for special
comment. The greatest problem facing the USSR in the application of electronics to
the armed forces lies in the translation of research results into actual production — the
intermediate engineering phase of industry. “Here, the prominent research institutes,
the technical laboratories, and the capable engineers of the highly developed Western
European electronics industry could make valuable contributions to Soviet progress in
radar, guided missile control, and other applications of electronics to modern warfare.
The importance of skills and facilities acquired in this field cannot be overestimated.
Based on the electronic tube production of Western Europe it is estimated that the
Soviet electronics capacity would be doubled or trebled by the acquisition of the Western
European facilities.

7. In aircraft and guided missile research and development the facilities of West-
ern Europe are substantial. Their acquisition may be expected to: increase the Soviet
capacity to produce existing types of guided missiles by 25-100 percent for certain
operational German varieties; advance the timetable for the development of long-range
(240 - 1200 miles) subsonic missiles by a few months; and increase the capacity for air-
craft research by 25 percent. The date on which the USSR will have supersonic air-
craft would not be advanced.

8. Since no significant progress in research and development of naval weapons
has been made in Western Europe since 1945, direct and immediate gains to the Soviets
would be slight. There are, however, groups of scientists and specific institutions in
these countries which have made valuable contributions to the design and development
of torpedoes and mines. If these were integrated into Soviet long-range plans for the
development of naval weapons, they might readily have an important effect upon the
ultimate product.

9. It is estimated that the Soviets are well prepared to wage chemical and biologi-
cal warfare. From the point of view of long-range plans, however, Western Europe
would provide the USSR with substantial physical facilities and highly competent per-
sonnel for the expansion of her production of both chemical and biological warfare
agents and research directed towards new and improved agents.

10. An inventory of the scientific and experimental engineering personnel and
the related equipment in the universities and industries of Western Europe makes an

TOP  fooser 22
Page-24
von gfe

impressive picture when compared with the corresponding assets of the comparatively
recently industrialized USSR. In Western Europe there are about eighty universities
and two hundred institutes of science, medicine, and technology, compared with thirty
universities and five hundred scientific institutes in the USSR. If the USSR were to
take over the Western European higher educational and organized research system in
toto, the Soviets would increase their reservoir of potential scientists, engineers, and
physicians by about 40 percent, and acquire 30 percent as many students as are now in
corresponding USSR institutes. Although a small fraction of the facilities and the
associated personnel might be exploited effectively shortly after the initial occupation,
gains to the Soviets from the great bulk of the scientific potential will require five to
nine years.

ll. Efforts of the USSR to integrate quickly the Western European scientific
and engineering personnel and facilities into the Soviet research program might lead
to confusion and dissipation of effort that could temporarily impede Soviet scientific
progress.

23 sop ener
Page-25
non giles

DETAILED BREAKDOWN

1, Atomic Enercy.
a. Summary.

By overrunning Western Europe the Soviets will be able to advance (a) the
date by which they may have exploded their first atomic bomb, and (b) the probable
date by which the Soviets will have exploded their first atomic bomb.

b, Advantages. i

Should the Soviets overrun Western Europe during 1948 the earliest date that
the Soviets may have exploded their first atomic bomb would be advanced three to six
months ahead of mid-1950; the probable date by which the Soviets will have exploded
their first atomic bomb would be advanced from mid-1953 to mid-1951. Should the
Soviets wait until December 1949 to overrun Western Europe, the earliest date that
the Soviets may have exploded their first atomic bomb would not be changed sub-
stantially; the probable date by which the Soviets will have exploded their first atomic
bomb might be advanced to mid-1952.

c. Disadvantages.

No important disadvantages to the Soviet atomic energy program are foreseen
in the Soviet occupation of Western Europe and the Middle East.

d. Discussion.

(1) The engineering and manufacturing facilities of Western Europe, if fully
exploited by the Soviets, would double the rate of progress of the Soviet atomic energy
program; of particular importance are the designers and manufacturers of precision
instruments and equipment.

(2) Soviet utilization of Western European skilled personnel would increase
considerably the efficiency of Soviet industry, and consequently accelerate the Soviet
atomic bomb project.

(3) Western European scientists who are Communists, and those who may
be complacent during Soviet occupation of Western Europe, can be expected to make
beneficial contributions to Soviet research and hence to long-range developments as-
sociated with the atomic energy program.

(4) Although considerable Western European research laboratory facilities
and equipment were destroyed or damaged during the last war, several countries, such
as Sweden and Switzerland, do have research facilities, which if acquired by the Soviets,
would not only accelerate the current Soviet atomic energy program but would also
contribute to future research and development.

(5) The present stockpile of uranium in France (equal to 25-50 percent of
present USSR stockpile) would be an immediate asset to the Soviet atomic energy .
program. Should adequate methods be developed for processing the uranium-bearing

25 rox glx

[py blank J
Page-26
TOP S9CRET

shales of Sweden, these shales would increase the annual Soviet uranium supply by
@ factor of five to ten.

2. BIoLoGicaL WARFARE.
a. Summary. |
Some advantages in biological warfare would be obtained by the USSR, in-

volving the risk of only minor disadvantages, in overrunning Western Europe and the
Middle East.

b. Advantages.

(1) The technical knowledge of France and western Germany, including
the results of years of research, together with the operating personnel of biological
research institutions, could shorten by perhaps a few months the time necessary for
the Soviets to achieve a specific goal in biological warfare capability.

(2) The Soviets would acquire a group of French biologists having out-
standing ability, who with other Western European scientists and engineers are capable
of producing bacteria by the aerated culture method, at present the most promising
large-scale bacteria production technique.

(3) A limited amount of specialized operational equipment with manufactur-
ing capacity to design and build additional equipment would be obtained.

ec. Disadvantages.
The drain upon both Soviet and indigenous medical facilities in several of the

countries of Western Europe, and particularly in the Middle East, might hamper
seriously the defensive combating of biological warfare.
d. Discussion.

(1) It is doubtful if the nations which had World War II biological warfare
programs could contribute anything to that which it is believed the Soviets already
know on the offensive aspects of biological warfare. However, by marshalling the per-
sonnel and knowledge of Western Europe for intensive biological warfare research, the
rate of Soviet accomplishment could be increased. Under the most favorable cir-
cumstance, where one or more Western European scientists have or could devise the
answer to the critical problems of dissemination, detection, and decontamination of
biological warfare agents, the effectiveness of Soviet employment of biological warfare
might be doubled or trebled in a short time.

(2) Despite the acceleration of the Soviet’s own public health program and
added emphasis on the training of physicians and assistants, the USSR could learn much
from the countries of Western Europe. In the furtherance of defensive measures
against biological warfare the doctors and public health administrators of Western
Europe could be of great value to the Russians.

3. CHEMICAL WARFARE.

a. Summary.

Some advantages and no disadvantages would accrue to the Soviets through
their overrunning Western Europe and the Middle East.

royfecer 26
Page-27
b. Advantages.

(1) The 15-20,000 qualified chemists and chemical engineers in Western
Europe would represent an estimated 50 percent increase in personnel under Soviet
control capable of conducting chemical warfare research and development.

(2) The chemical research and development facilities in France, Switzerland,
Italy, Belgium, Sweden, and western Germany would increase by approximately 50
percent the Soviet chemical research space adaptable to chemical warfare research.

(3) Soviet development of the German nerve gases that produce an extremely
high percentage of mortality, could be greatly enhanced by the German research chem-

ists and technicians who conducted the original work on the nerve gases. ake use!

(4) Amoderate number of facilities in France, Sweden, and Western Germany
for study and production of the more common chemical warfare agents would increase
the Soviet chemical warfare production capacity.

(5) Two French chemical warfare experimental stations and one Belgian
station would represent a minor increase in the Soviet's present physical facilities.

(6) Stocks of protective masks and clothing of improved design in Sweden,
Belgium, and France would enhance the USSR position in defensive chemical warfare.

c. Disadvantages.
No disadvantages to the USSR chemical warfare program are foreseen.
d. Discussion.

(1) Chemical research laboratories which the USSR would acquire in Western
Europe, in comparison with her own laboratories, would be of considerable value.
Similarly the USSR would acquire capable chemical research personnel and, of greater
immediate importance, the skilled technical force to operate an enlarged chemical
warfare industry. In three to six months the laboratories and personnel could increase
the Soviet capability in these categories by approximately 50 percent.

(2) In chemical warfare the countries of Western Europe and the Middle
East, with the exception of France, have concerned themselves only with the defensive
aspects. In Belgium, Denmark, France, Sweden, and Switzerland the respective armies
are to an appreciable degree equipped to withstand attack by chemical warfare agents.
It is probable that some technical information of importance to the USSR’s defensive
position might be obtained from the staffs of these armies.

(3) France besides her defensive preparations, has conducted research on
the nerve gases and has now progressed to a large-scale laboratory production of one
of these agents. The two French chemical warfare stations, though under-equipped
and under-manned, would be of value to the USSR. Protective masks developed by
various countries of Western Europe which would be improvements over existing So-
viet equipment would place USSR troops in a better defensive position in chemical war-
fare.

(4) The numerous chemical research centers in western Germany, western
Austria, Switzerland, Belgium, Sweden,. Denmark, and Italy could figure in long-range
development although their. immediate value might not be great, as the USSR has -

21 voy flows
Page-28
TOP S$! ET

undoubtedly used to the fullest extent the advanced state of German knowledge in
chemical warfare. The USSR’s present position with regard to chemical warfare is
so strong that the gains in Western Europe and the Middle East would be of greatest
importance in the expansion of Soviet production of chemical warfare agents and in the
long-term search for new and radical improvements.

4: ELEcrTRONIcs.

a. Summary.

The Soviets would have much to gain and nothing to lose in the field of elec-
tronic research, development, and production, by overrunning Western Europe. They
will neither gain nor lose in the field of electronics by overrunning the Middle East.

b. Advantages.

(1) The prominent research installations and outstanding research workers
of Western Europe could make immediate and valuable contributions to Soviet progress.
Of great importance would be the capability of development engineers and skilled
labor, together with their precision machine tools, to adapt new developments to the
needs of the USSR.

(2) Numerous specific types of developmental equipment which are improve-
ments over existing Soviet models would be obtained.

(3) Based on the electronic tube production capacity of Western Europe, it
is estimated that the Soviet electronics capacity would be doubled and possibly trebled
by the acquisition of the facilities of Western Europe.

c. Disadvantages.
No disadvantages to the Soviet electronics program are foreseen.
d. Discussion.

(1) The greatest problem facing the USSR in the application of electronics
to the armed forces lies in the translation of research results into actual production.
The Soviet’s greatest lack is in intermediate engineering, skilled labor, and precision
machine tools.

(2) In correcting the problem of actual applied electronics, development, and
production, the Soviet gain would be greatest in France, Holland, Italy, Switzerland, and
Sweden, in that order. In electronics research significant gains would be obtained in
France, Holland, Italy, and to a lesser extent in Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, and
western Germany, in that order.

5. Gurpep MissILes.

a, Summary.

Some advantages and no disadvantages would be obtained in the field of guided
missiles if the Soviets should overrun Western Europe. It is estimated that the Soviets
would gain more in the guided missile field by occupying Western Europe at the end of

rofhscnes 28
Page-29
ror floc

1949 than at the end of 1948, since Western European programs will be farther ad-
vanced by the end of 1949 and more new concepts, resulting in refinements in Soviet
missiles, would be acquired.

b. Advantages.

(1) By the end of 1948 acquisition of Western Europe would augment the
Soviet missile program by the addition of a significant number of qualified personnel
and guided missile facilities for basic research and development. This augmentation
might decrease by a few months the time for Soviet missile developments.

(2) By the end of 1949 the USSR would acquire in Western Europe significant
basic missile designs, probably a small number of completed test results, and some new
considerations in propulsion and guidance. These acquisitions might contribute con-
siderably to Soviet refinements of their own missile program and might decrease the
time required for the development of the more complex missiles.

(3) It is estimated that Western European production facilities for compon-
ents, instruments, and similar elements would increase by 25-100 percent the Soviet
capacity for production of existing types of guided missiles of the German operational
varieties, plus some version of the Wasserfall and possibly the Schmetterling surface-
to-air missiles.

c. Disadvantages.
No disadvantages to the Soviet guided missile program are foreseen.
d. Discussion.

(1) In the field of guided missiles Soviet occupation of Western Europe would
permit exploitation of relevant activity in France, Switzerland, and Sweden, the only
Western European countries presently engaged in missile development.

(2) By the end of 1948 Soviet acquisition of the French missile program
would provide a significant number of experienced personnel and usable guided missile
facilities qualified and organized for basic research. This situation in addition to
probable French innovations in fuel developments, might decrease by a few months
the time for Soviet development of long-range, subsonic missiles. By the end of 1949
Soviet acquisition of the French missile program would be more advantageous in that
the program would be augmented by certain phases of completed basic research and
test facilities in long-range, ram or turbojet missiles. Acquisition of these assets might
advance the Soviet timetable for development of long-range (240-1200 miles) missiles
by a few months.

(3) In Switzerland the primary advantage to the USSR by occupation would
be the scientific knowledge and technical experience accompanying the development
of the Oerlikon surface-to-air missile. During 1948 work on this missile may be far
enough advanced to assist the USSR in making refinements in similar Soviet missiles.
By the end of 1949 small quantities of the missiles as well as limited production fa-
cilities could be available to the Soviets. In this case, applied knowledge in missile
guidance and fusing would probably contribute in a small degree to further refinements

29 nov floner
Page-30
TOP S: ET

of existing Soviet missiles. Production experience may slightly accelerate the Soviet
missile manufacturing program.

(4) Though Sweden has evidenced some activity in guided missile develop-
ment, the activity has not been sufficiently extensive to afford important advantages
to the USSR.

(5) No guided missile research exists in the Middle East.

6. AIRCRAFT.

a. Summary.

In aircraft research and development some advantages and no disadvantages
would accrue to the USSR in occupying Western Europe. Considering the expected
improvements in the facilities, and the revitalizing of supporting industries, it is esti-
mated that it would be more advantageous from the standpoint of gains accruing in
aircraft research activities, for.the USSR to occupy Western Europe at the end of 1949
than at the end of 1948.

b. Advantages.

(1) In Western Europe the USSR would increase its capacity in aircraft re-
search by approximately 25 percent. The gain would be in trained aircraft research
personnel and in the considerable research facilities, primarily wind tunnels. Acquisi-
tion of this advantage would contribute mainly to Soviet subsonic aircraft research.

(2) Supporting industries which are now receiving increasing governmental
aid would come under Soviet control.

c. Disadvantages.
No disadvantages to Soviet aircraft development are foreseen.
d. Discussion.

(1) It is estimated that the acquisition of Western Europe in either 1948 or :
1949 would not advance the date on which the USSR would have operational supersonic
aircraft.

(2) The Western European countries possessing substantial aircraft research
facilities of value to the USSR are France and Sweden; Italy and Switzerland would con-
tribute some facilities of minor importance. The majority of the trained personnel
would come from the countries possessing the research equipment, but other countries
have some trained personnel primarily concerned with theoretical aeronautics and
aerodynamics.

(3) France is expected to spend approximately thirty million dollars from
1947 to 1952 for construction of new wind tunnels and modernization of existing wind
tunnels. An important installation, the German Oetztal wind tunnel, 25 feet in
diameter with Mach Number 1, is now under reconstruction and may be substantially
completed in 1949. Several small supersonic and subsonic wind tunnels are in opera-
tion. The work being conducted in France is mainly on prototype aircraft, but there
is some basic research being conducted in “flow” phenomena. Comparing these wind

TODYSECRET 30
Page-31
or floret

tunnel facilities with known facilities in or controlled by the USSR, it is estimated that
Soviet acquisition of the French aircraft research capacity would increase the former's
capacity by approximately 20 percent.

(4) In Sweden several wind tunnels are being utilized for research in ballis-
tics, gas dynamics, and aerodynamics. The equipment is modern in all respects but
the wind tunnels are small in size and limited in testing capacity. Swedish aircraft
research conducted in the high speed wind tunnels is limited to component parts rather
than complete aircraft. It is estimated that USSR acquisition of these installations
would increase Soviet aircraft research capacity by approximately 5 percent.

(5) No aircraft research exists in the Middle East.

7. Naval Weapons.

a. Summary.

In the field of naval weapons there are some advantages and no disadvantages
to the Soviets in overrunning Western Europe; no advantage or disadvantage will ac-
crue to the Soviets in the Middle East.

bd. Advantages.

(1) Research plants and testing laboratories for the production of naval
weapons in France, Italy, and Sweden would be a valuable acquisition to the USSR.

(2) Competent scientists and technicians who have made valuable con-
tributions to the design and development of torpedoes and mines in Italy and Sweden
would be a beneficial addition to the Soviet capability to develop naval weapons.

c. Disadvantages.
No disadvantages to Soviet naval weapon development program are foreseen.
d. Discussion.

(1) No significant progress in research and development on naval weapons
has been made in Western Europe since 1945. However, in France, Italy, and Sweden
there are research plants and testing laboratories for the production of naval weapons
that would be a valuable addition to similar types of Soviet installations.

(2) In Italy and Sweden a number of highly competent scientists and tech-
nicians have completed valuable work on the design and development of torpedoes
and mines and could increase the Soviet capability in this field though not necessarily
adding any knowledge not already possessed by the Soviets.

(3) No naval weapon research exists in the Middle East.

8. MISCELLANEOUS.

a. Summary.

The applied science and developmental engineering associated with the subject
industries in Western Europe, together with the trained personnel and facilities neces-
sary for their operation, would be one of the most important advantages to be derived
by the Soviets in the occupation of Western Europe.

31 tor gener
Page-32
TOP RET

b. Advantages.

The acquisition and assimilation of the experimental engineering, design and
development facilities, and trained personnel of the subject industries in Western
Europe could, by overcoming existing Soviet deficiencies, speed up the industrial plan-
ning and output of the USSR in all fields by an estimated 15-30 percent.

c. Disadvantages.
There are none foreseen.
d. Discussion.

(1) General.

(a) Nine countries in Western Europe and Scandinavia have significant
and well established applied research, process engineering, and product development
in one or more of these industries. Of the competent engineers and technicians who
supervise this development, many possess high skill and creativeness comparable to the
best technical ability in this country and consistent with’ the highly developed art of
these industries.

(b) In the aggregate the combined industrial potential of these coun-
tries is large. How large may be best visualized by considering an indirect measure
of industrial activity, such as, the relation of installed electrical capacity to the popu-
lation. These countries have a total electrical capacity of over twice that of the entire
USSR and half that of the United States, whereas the combined population is slightly
more than that of this country and almost equal to that of the USSR.

(c) In total technical potential for the six industries under discussion
the countries are in the order of their importance: France, western Germany, Italy,
Switzerland, Sweden, Belgium, Netherlands, Norway, and Denmark. Other European
countries and those of the Middle East have practically no important industry, except
the production and refining of petroleum. Since the petroleum companies of the Middle
East are foreign owned, the process development is carried on in the country of the
parent company and not in the territory under discussion.

(a) Important as the applied research of these European countries is,
considered merely as an integral part.of their industries, the significance to the Soviet
Union is much greater because in general the skills and equipment of the development
stage of an industry are equally applicable to a wide variety of problems within the
industry, in fact, oftentimes to those of related industries. Therefore the assimilation
of the applied research, engineering and design facilities of Europe within the USSR
industrial pattern should advance the over-all industrialization within a year’s time
substantially beyond that attributable alone to the acquisition of the production capa-
cities of these countries.

(2) Precision Machinery.

(a) Even though precision equipment plays an important strategic role
in the production of war material as well as normal civilian commodities, the Soviet's
precision machine tool industry was initiated just prior to the war and in 1941 produc-

roylvcrss 32
Page-33
roe glean

tion was very small. The industry was heavily damaged in the war, and in spite of
substantial receipts through lend-lease and the acquisition of large amounts of per-
cision equipment and tools from more than 1,000 plants in Germany, this type of
machinery is still critically short in the USSR.

(b) In Europe there are five countries that have well established pre-
cision machine tool industries. Switzerland leads the world in quality of fine measur-
ing tools, gage blocks, precision machinery and precision measuring techniques and
has a large supply of highly trained artisans and technicians. From a theoretical
engineering standpoint, the industry there is ahead of that in this country, though
behind in practical engineering. Sweden has one concern internationally famous
in the field of anti-friction and ball bearings. In France and Italy the precision ma-
chinery industry is closely allied with the automotive industry in which the leading
manufacturers have well integrated technical staffs skilled in the design and develop-
ment of precision machinery.

(c) The combined development potential in this industry in the European
countries is estimated to be at least equal to that of the US. In general, the highly
skilled technicians are as creative and ingenious as the leaders in this country, but
the supporting technicians are of inferior caliber.

(3) Instruments.

(a) Like the precision machinery industry the instrument industry in
the USSR was initiated immediately prior to the war. It was heavily concentrated
at Kiev and Leningrad and consequently badly damaged in the war. Even though
the fourth five-year plan calls for production of industrial instruments, both optical
and electric, seven times that of 1940, instrumentation continues to be one of the
critical items in Soviet industrial plans.

(b) In the scientific instrument field, the Western European countries
rank as follows: The Netherlands, western Germany, Switzerland, and France. The
others are of no consequence, although western Germany and Italy have important
optical industries. In general, the quality of instrument development in Europe is
inferior to that of this country and they have neither the talent nor the incentive
to produce gas diffusion instruments, such as were used in carload lots at Oak Ridge.
Although the instrument industry of Germany was badly damaged during the war,
remarkable progress has been made toward recovery in the British and US Zones,
where the plants remaining were found to be 90 percent intact. Much of the per-
sonnel and equipment in the instrument industry formerly located in Germany migrated
during the war to France, Italy, Sweden, and Switzerland. Hence, it is estimated that
the potential in the development and design of all types of instruments is as great in
Western Europe today as prewar.

(4) Liquid Fuels.

(a) The technical and operational level of the liquid fuels industry of

the USSR is relatively undeveloped and far behind that of this country. Although

thermal cracking in the production of gasoline started in 1928, there were still no
catalytic cracking units in the USSR at the outbreak of the war.

33 rox fener
Page-34
TOP S: ET

(b) In western Germany, France, and Sweden are sizable plants and
personnel especially trained in pilot plant operations for the production of both natural
and synthetic liquid fuels. France has three plants for processing shale, employing
1,800, of whom 40 are experienced in pilot plant and development work. Combined
production of these plants is roughly,600,000 metric tons per year. In addition, three
organizations concerned with applied research and development on liquid fuels have
at least twenty-five top flight engineers supported by as many more creative workers.
Germany has five hydrogenation and six Fisher-Tropsch plants employing some fifty
engineers with pilot plant experience. There is in addition one plant for processing
shale having at least forty employees with pilot plant experience. The combined capa-
city of these plants is 1,600,000 metric tons. Sweden has a single plant for processing
shale with a staff of fifty technically trained engineers, forty of whom have had pilot
plant experience. The installation consists of three or four projects all sponsored by
the Government. It is well integrated in the development and design phase. The
production of this plant is about 1,000,000 metric tons per year.

(c) For the production of synthetic fuels, these three countries have a
combined capacity of 3,200,000 metric tons per year, or 10 percent of the fourth Soviet
five-year plan of 35.4 million metric tons annual production of liquid fuels to be
achieved in 1950.

(5) Metallurgy—Specifically high temperature, high speed alloys and light
metals and their non-ferrous alloys.

In this field the development in Europe that would be of particular benefit
to the USSR is concentrated in the rather extensive hydroelectric metallurgical indus-
try in France, Northern Italy, Sweden, Norway, and Switzerland. These countries have
large electric smelting operations for aluminum and other metals as well as a wide
variety of other electric metallurgic processes. In general the equipment is good by
American standards and the metallurgists in charge of the technical developments of
these industries are highly trained, in fact more comprehensively trained than corre-
sponding personnel of this country. In Germany the industry for the manufacture of
high temperature alloys is better equipped with craftsmen and highly trained tech-
nicians than the corresponding American industry, where the chief problem is to bridge
the gap between scientific knowledge and the metal industry operators. This gap
between theory and practice exists to a much greater degree in the USSR. One concern
in Germany has a world-wide reputation for the melting of high temperature materials,
the development of large capacity melting furnaces and special techniques for the hot
rolling of high alloy materials. The high frequency and vacuum melting units of that
country are so important that probably they should be concentrated in an area where
they could be evacuated or destroyed in case of any move as postulated under this
project.

(6) Photographic Supplies and Fine Chemicals.

In Belgium a single firm dominates the photographic field, producing
films, plates, paper, and chemicals for exports to all parts of the world, except US, Japan,
and Soviet-dominated countries. It is one of the world’s largest producers of film.

ror loner 34
Page-35
voy pbs

France and Germany have large and well established chemical industries Producing all
types of dyes, photographic materials, and fine chemicals.” In conjunction with these
large chemical industries, there may be presumed to be a substantial amount of
applied research and experimental engineering in progress. In Switzerland several
firms are leaders in the manufacture of fine chemicals of high quality.

(1) Plastics (Including synthetic rubber).

Practically the only output in Western Europe of synthetic rubber is from
experimental projects. France and Switzerland have well established plastic indus-
tries, individual members of which have cross-licensing agreements with corresponding
American firms. Because of this arrangement, many of this country’s most recent
developments in the field of plastics and current technical information would become
available to the USSR.

9. PERSONNEL.
a, Summary.

In Western Europe, with the exception of Spain and Portugal, the USSR would
gain considerably in the acquisition of industrial and educational laboratory facilities
and their associated scientific and technological personnel. In the Middle East the gain
would be negligible.

b, Advantages.

(1) Given an estimated six months to two years for coordination, the Soviets
would increase their active scientific and engineering manpower by approximately fifty
percent, their potential reservoir of scientists (i.e. students) by approximately 40 per-
cent, their laboratory facilities for research by approximately 50 percent.

(2) Included in the above would be a small but important number of
scientists and engineers who, because of the international character of the companies
where they are employed, have knowledge of US and UK research and developmental
trends.

ec. Disadvantages.

The attempt to integrate Western European scientific and engineering per-
sonnel into Soviet research programs might lead to confusion and dissipation of effort
that could temporarily impede Soviet progress.

d. Discussion,
(1) Research Equipment and Laboratories.

(a) In Western Europe there are about eighty universities and 200 insti-
tutes of science, medicine, and technology, as compared with thirty universities and
500 scientific institutes in the USSR. Thus, by overrunning Western Europe, the
USSR would acquire more than twice the number of universities which it has at
present, and almost half the number of specialized institutes.

35 TOP, ‘CRET
Page-36
vor fs

(b) The Research Centers which would be of the most immediate benefit
to the USSR are the weapons laboratories in Switzerland, Sweden, and Italy; the aero-
dynamics facilities in France; the nuclear physics laboratories in France, Switzerland,
Belgium, and Scandinavia; and the electronics laboratories at Paris, France and at
Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

(c) The advantage accruing in laboratory facilities, ie, expropriated
precision measuring instruments, cyclotrons, wind tunnels, and other equipment, would
range from an immediate gain of some 5 percent in USSR domestic efficiency to a
steadily increasing gain of some 50 percent for all the Soviet area.

(2) Scientific Manpower.

(a) In Western Europe there are approximately 260,000 students in
higher educational institutions, while the USSR proper has about 660,000 such students.
The present Soviet zone of influence probably increases the number of Soviet-dominated
students by approximately 20 percent. If the USSR were to take over the Western
European educational system in toto, the Soviets would increase their reservoir of
potential scientists, engineers, and physicians by about 40 percent.

(b) By using a broad estimate based on the fact that most of the coun-
tries of Western Europe have, on an average, a comparable number of scientists per
head of population, it is believed that the Soviet scientific manpower potential, both
industrial and academic, would be increased about 80 percent given full collaboration
from these scientists. However, practical difficulties such as employing each in his
most useful field, the possibility of non-collaboration, and the inadequacy of certain
facilities would suggest about 50 percent as the final probable advantage.

(c) It is believed that the technological advance made by the USSR
since World War II is due in large measure to the use of those Europeans, particularly
the Germans, not under control of the Soviets. By applying the lessons learned in the
Soviet zones of Germany and Austria, the USSR could begin to receive certain benefits
from the services of acquired scientific personnel in six months to a year.

(3) Scientific Projects under Development.

(a) The extent of the benefits to be derived would depend on the status
of the research projects in the acquired laboratories and on how clcsely such projects
parallel Soviet paths of investigation.

(b) The laboratories mentioned in 4 (a) above, are engaged in research
projects which, because of the quality of the men, equipment, and type of investigations,
would become Russia’s chief asset in scientific war potential.

(4) Total Advantages to USSR.

A projected scientific advantage would result from Soviet control of
Western Europe; that is, by the integration of the scientific strength now scattered
among the independent European nationals. In Sweden and Belgium, although finan-
cial support is considered adequate, there is a lack of competent nuclear physicists;
in Denmark and Italy there are good scientists but they are hampered by a lack of

TOP fr 36
Page-37
rollers

funds; in Holland, by a lack of equipment. The Soviets probably would move the
scientists in Denmark and Holland, for example, to the equipment in Sweden; and to
appropriate funds for those research establishments most likely to produce best results,
whatever their “national” location.

37 rypfhecner
Page-38
nox flere

POLITICAL APPENDIX
CONCLUSIONS

Political considerations do not favor a Soviet decision to overrun Western Europe
and the Near East prior to 1 January 1950.

This conclusion is based principally on the following considerations:
1, Occupation of Western Europe and the Near East would vastly increase Soviet
security and administrative problems, and would create serious political instability
throughout the Soviet orbit in the event of war.
2. The traditional Communist methods of subversion and infiltration, which are less
costly and involve less risk than military action, still offer substantial possibilities for
continued achievement of Soviet objectives.

DISCUSSION

1. OUTLINE oF PoLiTIcaL CONSIDERATIONS INFLUENCING A SoviET DecISION TO OVERRUN
‘WESTERN EUROPE AND THE NEAR EAST BEFORE JANUARY 1, 1950.

a. Within the USSR.
Advantages.

(1) If it were possible to perpetuate the myth that the USSR was about to
be attacked, the war might have the effect of unifying the Soviet people behind their
government.

(2) The arrival of consumers’ goods from Western Europe would serve to
placate to some extent dissatisfaction among the Soviet people with the war.

(3) Easy initial victories of Soviet troops would enhance national pride and
thus raise morale of the Soviet people.

Disadvantages.

(1) The resultant global conflict would place the entire Soviet system at
stake in a war to the finish at a time when the USSR is inferior to the West in potential
military power.

(2) Preparation for such an attack would serve to increase discontent among
the Soviet people since Soviet industrial production would have to be increasingly
diverted to military rather than consumer's purposes.

(3) The war would risk creating popular discontent within the USSR and
would strain an already war-weary people.

(4) The war would make the task of internal security control within the
USSR more difficult since the demand for trained security forces elsewhere in Europe
would be so great.

(5) The war would risk mass desertions from the Soviet Army and might
pave the way for anti-Soviet guerrilla action by Ukrainians and other Soviet peoples.

39 noyllene

[p38 blank]
Page-39
TORJSECRET

(6) The overrunning of Western Europe and the Near East would make it
far more difficult to insulate the Soviet people against what the regime considers the
pernicious influence of foreign “bourgeois” culture.

(7) The war would risk increase in influence of the military and might con-
stitute development of an organized and armed rival to the Party.

b. Within the Present Soviet Satellites.
Advantages.

(1) The present lack of effective opposition to the Communists would make
occupation relatively easy.

(2) The conquest of Western Europe would bring all of Europe under direct
Soviet influence and thus eliminate the capacity of contiguous non-Communist coun-
tries to influence the satellite Peoples against the Soviet system.

Disadvantages.

(1) The USSR would have to deal With opposition, which might emerge
among elements, quiescent under indigenous Communist occupation, that might rise
in case of foreign occupation.

(2) Replacement of present Soviet troops by green, inexperienced forces might
lead to excesses against local populations.

(3) Soviet personnel both stationed in and in transit through present Soviet

Satellites would see the contrast between standard of living in the USSR and the
Satellites.

ec. Western Europe.
- Advantages.
(1) Occupation would extend the area under Soviet political control to cover
all of Europe. The USSR would thus be able to eliminate all organized anti-Soviet

opposition on a national level and would gain a free hand in the Communist indoc-
trination of the population.

Disadvantages.

(1) Lack of trained Soviet personnel to administer the occupied areas would
make the tasks of control and exploitation difficult.

(2) There is probability that Western European morale will be lowered because
of Soviet inability to replace American help in food and raw materials to an exhausted
Western Europe.

(3) Adverse effect of aggressive Soviet occupation on residue of sympathy for
USSR among Western Europeans.

(4) Present Soviet and local Communist ability to criticize and disrupt with-
out assuming responsibilities would be exchanged for the necessity to produce and
deliver.

(5) Soviet occupation, requisitions for army of occupation, and suppressive
Soviet measures would bring underground resistance which would provoke further
repressive measures. In contrast to the German occupation which found Western

TOY SECRET 40
Page-40
voy esas

populations inexperienced in underground or partisan warfare, Soviet occupation would
find them familiar with both.

(6) Subjection of Soviet troops and other personnel to Western democratic,
. Trotskyite, and anarchist propaganda. The last two groups are probably stronger in
France at present than in any other country.

d. Near East,

Advantages.

(1) Occupation of Near East would give the USSR an advanced base for the
political infiltration of North Africa, Pakistan, and India.

(2) The elimination of Western political, economic, and cultural influence in
the Near East would eliminate political “capitalist encirclement” of the USSR in that
vulnerable area.

e. The United States.

Advantages.

(1) The Soviet leaders might expect that their initial successes would produce
pacificism and defeatism among various groups in the US.

Disadvantages.

(1) The Soviet attack would probably unite the American people and prevent
the USSR from exploiting internal antagonisms in the US.

(2) The war would lead to strict control of Communists throughout the
Western Hemisphere, thereby reducing opportunity for sabotage.

f. Rest of the World.

Advantages.

(1) The war might be the signal for insurrections in colonial areas.

(2) Soviet seizure of Near East might intimidate Egypt, India, and Pakistan
into following neutral policy.

(3) Soviet seizure of Western Europe and the Near East would serve to bolster
Communist groups in the Far East.

Disadvantages.

(1) Soviet seizure of Western Europe and the Near East might have the effect
of strengthening the regimes of most non-European countries and uniting them into
a cohesive bloc directed against the USSR.

2, PROBABLE SovieT ANALYSIS OF THE POLITICAL CONSIDERATIONS OUTLINED ABOVE.
a. Within the USSR.
Advantages.

(1) The Kremlin probably would have no illusions that a war would unite
the Soviet people behind their government. Soviet experience with the Ukrainians
and certain of the Crimean and Caucasian peoples during World War II should serve
to remind the Kremlin that its subjects are far from united. Furthermore, it is doubt-

41 ro even
Page-41
roe fcr

ful that the Kremlin would predicate a major decision on an estimate of its ability to
control public opinion. Some observers question the Politburo’s success in assaying
public opinion and sentiment. The elaborate network of spies and informers which
has spread throughout all Soviet political, economic, and cultural life is evidence that
the Kremlin is aware of this weakness,

(2) Increased availability of consumer goods—in the form of plunder from
the West—would undoubtedly dispel some of the popular dissatisfaction with another
war. It would, however, create another source of irritation, evident during the latter
days of World War II—the dissatisfaction of the average Soviet citizen with distribution
of the spoils. Furthermore, most of the Soviet people remember the privations suf-
fered during 1941-1945, and would not be anxious to undergo again the suffering in-
herent in a prolonged war.

(3) Easy victories are, of course, a source of satisfaction to any national ego.
However, the true test of a nation and its morale is its unity and determination in the
face of adversity. The Kremlin is inhabited by planners, who look at long-range
objectives as well as short-range, and it is doubtful that they would act on the basis
of short-term advantage alone.

Disadvantages.

(1) The Soviet leaders, many of whom have spent thirty years in building
up the power and prestige of their Socialist state, would be reluctant to stake their life's
work on such an uncertain gamble for world power. The present leaders have con-
sistently followed a policy distinguished chiefly by caution, and unless Stalin dies soon
and the power exercised by him and his associates falls into the hands of younger and
more impulsive leaders, it seems improbable that the USSR would presently risk a
major war against the West.

(2) Soviet production is already geared primarily to military rather than
consumer-goods production, and, while war preparations would further curtail the
supply of consumer-goods and thus increase internal dissatisfaction, this condition
might be temporarily alleviated by the arrival of loot from the West.

(3) While, in the initial stages, easy victories and loot would probably mini-
mize any risk of popular discontent, the Kremlin would undoubtedly consider the long-
range considerations more compelling, when the risk of popular discontent would be
substantial. This, in conjunction with other factors (such as point four) would con-
stitute a powerful deterrent to direct military action.

(4) Soviet obsession with security, as such, is well known to the western,
world and, at times, reaches extremes ridiculous to western eyes. The security forces
of the USSR constitute an elite guard, especially chosen and intensively trained, and
are thus limited in numbers. Current indications, such as the intellectual purges,
anti-espionage legislation, etc., are that the Politburo considers present security ma-
chinery inadequate or at least not wholly effective. It is likely, therefore, that the
Kremlin would overestimate rather than underestimate the security problems that a
new war would engender.

(5) In the initial stages, the Soviet armed forces could, in all probability, cope
with the problems of desertion and guerrilla activity, but the Kremlin probably realizes

tof encnen 42
Page-42
rox lenox

that these factors would constitute a sizeable problem in a prolonged war, especially if
shrewdly exploited by the psychological campaign of the West.

(6) Insulation of the Soviet people from foreign influences continues to be a
matter of primary Kremlin concern. As in World War I, wartime conditions would
undoubtedly weaken Soviet ideological defenses against Western influence. Judging
from current efforts to eliminate the “survivals of capitalism,” the dangers of exposing

the Soviet people to foreign influences is probably substantially exaggerated by Krem-
lin minds.

(7) The Kremlin's jealousy of the military was indicated in the personnel
shifts which followed World War I. While party control of the Army is probably
sufficient, at least for the initial stage of “easy victories,” the Kremlin might well be
reluctant to have too much political responsibility devolve again upon the armed forces.
Emphasis on the military inherent in a long war, would be especially undesirable if,
during hostilities, the regime should undergo any fundamental transitions (such as
might occur with the death of Stalin).

b. Within the Present Soviet Satellites.
Advantages.

(1) Kremlin leaders undoubtedly estimate that, under present conditions,
Soviet forces would have little initial difficulty in occupying the whole of Eastern Eu-
rope. With all the satellite governments amenable to Moscow wishes, Soviet strate-
gists would foresee no immediate effective opposition to direct Moscow control. In
several of the East European countries such a move would merely mean replacing and
increasing present occupation forces, and thus would offer no serious political com-
plications. From the Moscow point of view, however, direct occupation of Eastern
Europe is, in itself, highly undesirable, no matter how easy of execution. For the
ultimate gains to the Communist cause in the satellite area are more readily attained
under a Kremlin policy of ostensible non-interference in the affairs of the “friendly”
neighbors of the. Soviet Union. Soviet policymakers further must realize that the
Eastern European peoples have accumulated a latent store of hatred for Communism.
Consequently, an occupation that outwardly would look easy of execution could, in
the long run, prove extremely costly.

(2) Soviet leaders have shown, by their many drastic attempts to seal off the
satellite countries from Western Europe, that they regard the flow of Western demo-
cratic ideas into Eastern Europe as extremely harmful to the Communist cause. The
Kremlin no doubt realizes that most of the Eastern European countries have known
a higher standard of living than that thus far achieved under Communism. With the
growing disparity in living standards between Communist Eastern Europe and ERP-
aided Western Europe, and the comparative freedom of the latter, the Kremlin should
foresee trouble arising from the impact of these factors on the ideologically unassim-
ilated peoples of Eastern Europe. The Politburo might consider the need for severing
this flow of subversive ideas into Eastern Europe as a strong argument for military
occupation of the entire continent.

43 TOP ASECRET
Page-43
TOP SfcRET

Disadvantages.

(1) Soviet leaders realize from experience of recent years the bitterness
aroused in East European peoples by their subjection to Communist puppet govern-
ments, imposed with the backing of Soviet armed forces. The Soviet leaders also must
estimate that increased anti-Communist underground movements throughout the
satellites are an ever present threat, ready to resort to guerrilla and subversive action
whenever sufficiently encouraged by the hope of external support. Kremlin planning
must assume that encouragement and support for these underground movements
would, in the event of Soviet aggression, be forthcoming from the United States. The
Prospect of widespread and effective underground activity behind Soviet front lines
would consequently have a strong effect in dissuading the Kremlin from direct military
action.

(2) The activities of Soviet troops during and after World War II, of which
Kremlin leaders are fully cognizant, left a bitter imprint on the peoples of Eastern
Europe. Personnel of the Soviet Armed Forces proved generally poor salesmen for
Communism. In the event of Soviet occupation of the European continent, the more
experienced and better disciplined troops would Probably be deployed on the outer
defense perimeter of Western Europe and the Near East. Eastern Europe, occupied by
less disciplined forces, might be subjected to a second round of plunder and rapine
before the bitter experience of World War II had even been forgotten. The excesses
of Soviet forces occupying Eastern Europe would thus be likely to Provoke such a
degree of local resistance as to Present the Soviet command with a grave security
problem. Mounting sabotage and Guerrilla warfare would probably threaten lines
of communication. Kremlin leaders, well aware of the manifold difficulties caused
by lack of proper discipline among their troops in the past, would be reluctant to face
similar problems in the future.

(3) In view of the high rate of disaffection and desertion prevalent among
present Soviet occupation forces, the Kremlin would be seriously concerned as to the
wisdom of exposure of large additional forces to the same influences. Few questions
appear to concern the Kremlin more than the ideological purity of its subjects, and
Soviet leaders have learned by bitter experience that the “remnants of capitalist flesh-
pots” in Eastern Europe may corrupt even its best disciplined troops.

c. Western Europe.

Advantages.

(1) Occupation of Western Europe, which would give the Soviet Union control
of all of the European continent, should appear to the Kremlin a very great political
advantage. The long-term objective of Soviet leaders is to hasten the downfall of
capitalism in all parts of the world, and to replace it with orthodox Communism. To
Sovietize the nations of Western Europe, with their world-wide Prestige and influence,
would be a tremendous step toward the realization of this long-range objective. The
short term objective of the Kremlin is to ensure the security of the Soviet Union. The
control of Western Europe would dispel to a great extent the fear of “capitalist encircle-

TOP SRET 44
Page-44
vor flower

ment" from that area in the minds of the Soviet leaders. US influence on the Eurasian
land mass would simultaneously be brought to a controllable minimum.

Disadvantages.

(i) The lack of trained Soviet personnel to administer the occupied areas of
Western Europe would probably be viewed by the Kremlin as a formidable disadvantage.
Soviet leaders, because of their inherent suspicion of Western Europeans, and because
of their reliance within the USSR on a tightly controlled bureaucracy, would probably
desire to have a larger number of reliable Soviet personnel in the occupied areas than
would be available. While this lack could be offset to some degree by the use of local
Communists and fellow travellers, the Kremlin appears reluctant to trust alien Com-
munists with major responsibility.

(2) The Kremlin in all likelihood would consider that Western European
morale would be lowered because of Soviet inability to supply the area with necessary
food, raw materials, and manufactured products. It is not believed, however, that the
Soviet leaders would consider the lowering of Western European morale as a major
political disadvantage. The Kremlin might actually consider lower Western European
morale as a political advantage on the assumption that a people without hope would
Prove much more amenable to Communist discipline and ideology.

(3) The Kremlin would probably realize that an aggressive Soviet occupation.
would have an adverse effect on the existing residue of sympathy for the USSR among
Western Europeans. The Soviet leaders follow a policy based on the dictatorship of
a comparatively small group, and therefore might tend to minimize the effects of this
loss of popular sympathy. Furthermore, they might calculate that such a loss would
occur only in the initial stages of occupation, and could subsequently be regained. Tra-
ditional respect of Western Europeans for civil rights, and experience in parliamentary
government, would probably be of no great concern to the Kremlin.

(4) The Soviet leaders would probably have some trepidation as to the ability
of leaders and members of Soviet and local Communist parties properly to carry out
the administration of the occupied countries. Judging from the difficulties in East-
ern Europe on this score, the Kremlin might be hesitant to take on such a colossal
commitment which would, in their minds, positively bring on a war with the US, with
resultant sharp increase of difficulty of political administration of Western Europe.

(5) Any Kremlin estimate of underground resistance as a political disadvan-
tage would depend largely on two factors—(1) the number of occupation troops the
USSR could maintain in the various countries of Western Europe, and (2) its con-
fidence in its ability to win the ensuing war with the US. The Soviet leaders would
probably estimate that ruthless counteraction by Soviet occupation forces with the
aid of local Communists, who are uniquely equipped for such activity by training and
World War II experience, could prevent underground resistance from assuming serious
proportions. The Kremlin would further realize that underground resistance to Soviet
occupation would increase in the event of Soviet military reverses.

(6) The subjection of Soviet troops and other personnel to the culture and
standards of living of Western Europe would undoubtedly present a very formidable po-

45 TOP JECRET
Page-45
TOP SECRET

litical disadvantage in Kremlin eyes. The constant attempt of the Soviet leaders to
keep any Western influence from permeating the USSR, the record of desertions in Ger-
many, and the stringent reindoctrination of returning occupation personnel show the
Kremlin's fear of Western European influence on the Soviet population. The occupa-
tion of all Western Europe would expose such a large segment of Soviet personnel to
some of the chief wellsprings of Western culture and ideology. Such exposure might
not only seriously infect the morale of the occupation troops themselves, but could
spread back into the Soviet civilian population.

d. Near East.

Advantages.

(1) Occupation of the Near East undoubtedly appeals to the Kremlin in
that such action would further extend the area of Soviet influence and provide an ad-
vance base for the political infiltration of areas adjacent to the Near East. This ad-
vantage would, in the minds of Soviet leaders, be at least partially negated by the fact
that military action in itself would tend to strengthen anti-Communist elements in
adjacent areas and would thus make political infiltration much more difficult. Military
action in the Near East would mark the abandonment by the Soviet Union of tactics
employed more or less successfully since the end of the war. There is little evidence
to substantiate the belief that Soviet methods of infiltration, subversion, and sabotage
have reached the point of bankruptcy in the Near East.

(2) The Kremlin, in any contemplation of direct military action in the Near
East, would consider the importance of eliminating Western political, economic, and
cultural influence in that area. The importance of this influence at the present time
may well be overestimated by the ever-suspicious USSR. Should the Kremlin become
deluded by its own propaganda concerning “capitalistic encirclement” and become con-
vinced of imminent aggressive action on the part of the United States, the elimination
of US political, as well as military influence in the Near East might be a decisive factor
in determining Soviet policy.

Disadvantages.

(1) The unification of the Moslem world against the USSR would undoubtedly
appear to the Kremlin as a deterrent to direct military action. The population within
the area occupied by the USSR would have a considerable potential for guerrilla action
against the Soviets. In view of the nomadic character of many of the peoples and
the problems of border control which would face the Soviet forces, movement of enemy
reinforcement of personnel and material from the remainder of the Near and Middle
East would be practically impossible to control. Those Moslems outside the area of
Soviet occupation could be expected strongly to support any allied action against the
Soviet position, particularly if furnished arms by the US.

e. The United States.
Advantages.

(1) The possibility of self-delusion within the Soviet hierarchy has been
mentioned previously, and is likely to be a factor in connection with Soviet estimates

TOP fore 46
Page-46
*

noe open

of the United States. Dictatorships of the past have been prone to underestimate
the moral and political fibre of democratic Peoples, and the Kremlin is Probably no
exception. Furthermore, Soviet leaders might hope that certain elements in the
United States would attempt to impede an all-out military effort. Furthermore, Soviet
propaganda, and perhaps Soviet intelligence as well, have for so long been emphasizing
the disparity between the sentiments of the American people and the policies of their
government that, in the view of some observers, the Kremlin may have persuaded itself
that the US Government can no longer command adequately the confidence and loyalty
of the people.

If Soviet estimates of the US have been distorted by the foregoing considera-
tions, some Soviet leaders might reason: (1) that the “laboring masses” of the US
would have no stomach for a war against the USSR for control of Europe; (2) that
so long as US territory was not attacked, the US would be incapable of a united effort;
(8) that, once the magnitude of the effort and sacrifice involved became apparent,
US public opinion would be subject to growing doubt and uncertainty; and (4) that
finally, by shrewdly exploiting the foregoing, the USSR could argue that all it sought
Was an equitable division of the globe between the two great powers, and thus could
achieve either a negotiated peace, or at least a condition of armed truce, during which
to consolidate its European positions and prepare for the decisive conflict at a later date,

Disadvantages.

(1) Despite the foregoing, however, the Kremlin has shown in the past that
it can face facts and learn from experience, even when contrary to Marxist teachings.
The Politburo, at least, must have been impressed with the US contributions in World
War II—with the proved US moral and material capabilities. Furthermore, the Krem-
lin is today seeing a virtually unprecedented example of US solidarity and determina-
tion in resisting Soviet expansion. The US Communists are rapidly losing mass sup-
port—especially from the ranks of labor. Thus, Moscow can hardly fail to consider
that Soviet aggression would be met by a united and determined US resistance.

(2) While Moscow probably counts heavily on the sabotage capabilities of
international Communist organizations, the US is moving rapidly to reduce this danger.
Furthermore, the experience of the Germans and Japanese with sabotage in the US
can offer the Kremlin small encouragement.

b. Rest of the World.
Advantages.
(1) While the global war resulting from Soviet aggression might encourage
insurrections in colonial areas throughout the world, the USSR would be in a poor

position to influence or direct such insurrections, and hence, could hardly expect to
exploit them for Communist ends.

(2) While Soviet seizure of the Near East might intimidate Egypt, India,
and Pakistan into following a neutral policy, from the Kremlin point of view it might
well have the opposite effect. Ifa “Holy War” were proclaimed, Moslems of all three
countries would undoubtedly participate against the USSR. Furthermore, there is

47
Page-47
»

TOP SECRET

no guarantee from the Soviet point of view that these three countries might not join
an anti-Soviet bloc.

: (3) While Soviet successes in Western Europe and the Near East would
undoubtedly temporarily enhance Communist prestige and power in the Far East, the
Soviet leaders would soon have to come to a decision as to whether to exploit the
northern part of the area. The Kremlin would probably estimate that the rest of the
Far East was too low on the Soviet timetable to be exploited by either the USSR or
local Communists.

Disadvantages.

(1) The Kremlin has always displayed a great fear of the possibility of facing
a world united against it. In considering aggression, the fact that these moves may
unite most nations of the world in action against the USSR will be an important factor
in dissuading the Kremlin from taking aggressive action.

(2) It appears unlikely that the Kremlin believes it can be assured of
friendly, or at least neutral, regimes, especially in the Far East, without expending
considerable political effort which would require a partial and costly diversion of at-
tention from Europe and the Near East. Without the assurance of a security belt
along its Far Eastern borders, the accompanying danger of a vulnerable “back door”
will probably serve as a deterrent to Soviet aggressive action.

(3) Evaluated in terms of long-range objectives, the relatively small posi-
tive gains for the Soviet Union, both in Latin America and the Far East as a result of
aggressive action, would be less than could be expected to result from peaceful
exploitation of discontent among the population of these areas and the use of local
Communist groups eventually to install regimes sympathetic to the USSR.

rovffecnes 48
Page-48
%

“

 

   

 

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
3017—S—1948