
Page-1
SE
. CONTR ID DISSEM
LEJ LIBRARY =
andatory Revi,
Case # NU ed

Document #5

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE .

The Effects of Hurricane Flora on Cuba

APPROVED POR RELBASE

MAR 2000

SPECIAL

NUMBER 85-3-63

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
* Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf
15 NOVEMBER 1963.

SEQRET
couse DISSEM N °

SNIE 85-3-63
15 November 1963

z

-
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated
this estimate:

 

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence « organizations of the Depart.
ments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA,

 

Concurring:

 

Director of Intelligence and Resecich, Department °
Director, Defense intelligence Agency

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Deparime of the Army

Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), Departm nt of the Nevy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF

Director of the National Security Agency *

 

 

 
  

Abstaining:

The Atomic Energy Commission Represent ive to the USIB, and ‘the Assistant

Director, Federal Bureau of Investig
jurisdiction.

 

the subject being outside of their

 

   
        

9 the National Defense of the United States
Iws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information aff
within the meaning of the espionag,
mission or revelation of which in,

 

 

ah es
Page-3
SPECIAL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE .
NUMBER 85-3-63

The Effects of Hurricane Flora on Cuba
Page-4
THE EFFECTS OF
. HURRICANE FLORA
ON CUBA .

CONCLUSIONS

A. Hurricane Flora was the worst that ever hit Cuba. Its most
important consequence has been to exacerbate the already serious
economic problems of the regime. (Paras. 1-2, 19, 20)

B. Cuban agriculture was hardest hit, but transportation and
communications also suffered major damage. Industrial and
military facilities escaped relatively lightly. Oriente and Cama-
guey, the two provinces which bore the brunt of the storm, suf-
fered heavy losses of homes and personal property. (Paras. 4-15)

C. The regime had hoped that economic improvement would
follow this year’s harvest. Flora must have substantially di-
minished these hopes and, because of damage to sugar cane, has
also dimmed prospects for 1965. The estimated 1964 sugar har-
vest will probably be reduced by about 15 percent. Even so, Cuba
may still exceed its 1963 foreign exchange earnings if higher
sugar prices hold—as now seems likely. Because of the eco-
nomic costs of reconstruction, economic development will be re-
tarded unless there is an increase in Soviet Bloc assistance.
(Paras. 9, 21, 22)

D. Cuba’s need for greater aid will add to the strains already

manifest in Cuban-Soviet relations. We believe the Soviets will
not give Castro all the assistance he desires, but that they will

continue to provide aid at approximately the current level along
with meeting emergency needs. (Paras. 23-27)

E. For another few weeks or months, Castro will probably
succeed in rallying most Cubans to special efforts and to ac- »

f 1
Page-5
f

ceptance of unusual hardships. Thereafter, shortages of goods,
the continuation of depressed living conditions, and the regime’s
resort to draconian measures will alienate an increasing part
of the citizenry. Even so, unless there is major dissidence within
the military establishment, he and the minority wedded to him
will probably be able to maintain control. We believe that Castro

will not reduce to any significant degree his incitement of sub- =

version in Latin America. (Paras. 28, 29)
Page-6
DISCUSSION

|. THE ECONOMY BEFORE FLORA

1. Flora, the worst hurricane ever to hit Cuba, struck an economy
that was already stagnant. Gross national product and personal con-
sumption were less than in 1958, and there was no evidence that sig-
nificant progress was in sight. Shortages of replacement _parts—re-
sulting largely from the US embargo—were a chronic and very serious
source of concern to the regime. Shortages of many foodstuffs and
almost all other consumer goods remained the most conspicuous feature
of the Cuban economy. The distribution system continued to be un-
reliable and the rationing system was becoming increasingly burdensome.

2. The degree of misdirection and mismanagement by the Castro
regime has been extraordinary. Failing in its ill-conceived attempt
to transform Cuba quickly into an industrial economy, the regime
had begun to re-emphasize agricultural production. It had achieved
little or no success in this program, partly because the revolution has
induced a large migration of farm workers to other Occupations, Many
of the small factories recently built with Soviet Bloc assistance produce
things at ridiculously high cost (e.g., an antibiotics plant), or in quan-
tities far beyond Cuban needs (e.g., a pick and shovel factory which can
produce all of Cuba’s requirements in a few weeks). The regime’s
centralization of economic administration has seriously hampered the
decision-making process, partly because it placed too much respon-
sibility in a few hands and partly because the new bureaucracy is largely
untrained and inexperienced. Its efforts to increase labor productivity
have had little result, and absenteeism, indifference, and scattered
sabotage remain serious problems. These might become more severe
if Castro decides to apply the work norm program which has been
introduced experimentally in a number of enterprises.

3. Before Flora, the regime had been undertaking measures likely
to cause further unrest among farmers. Just prior to the hurricane,
a new decree nationalized practically all farms larger than 166 acres.
This “Second Agrarian Reform Law” will dispossess approximately 8,000
landowners and will add about 4.5 million acres to the 9.4 million
already nationalized. It will increase state-owned farm Jand to some
64 percent of the total, the remainder being held by small private.
farmers. Castro has stated that the nationalization decree will be
his last agrarian reform measure and that the small private farmers will
not be bothered. Nevertheless, the regime has indicated in the past
that it considers 67 acres as the optimum size for an individual farm,
and this must cause foreboding among the approximately 25,000 owners
of farms between 67 and 166 acres. Furthermore, Castro has indicated -

f 3
Page-7
ET

that private farmers will be allowed to retain their land only if they
utilize it efficiently. Aware that the interpretation of efficiency resides
with Castro and the government apparatus, the private farmers also
know that arbitrary seizure is possible at any time.

I. EXTENT OF DAMAGE *

4. The considerable body of pertinent information from photography,

from the regime’s own statements, from clandestine reports, and from
the limited access of foreign observers, is not enough to provide a com-
plete picture of the damage sustained. In the case of sugar cane, where
much damage may result from inundation, it will be weeks or even
months before we know the whole story.

5. Casualties and Disease Problems. As of 20 October the Cuban
regime reported that Flora had caused over 1,100 deaths, almost all
in Oriente.

6. The regime estimates that it had to evacuate some 175,000 peo-
ple from their homes; the public health problem is serious. It is
too early to ascertain the effectiveness of the regime’s efforts to control
the total health threat, but enough medical supplies appear to have been
offered and administered to have prevented any immediate danger of
the spread of epidemic diseases. Some general increase of communicable
disease can be anticipated because of inadequate sanitation, inadequate
reserves of medicines for normal use, and the inability of Cuban industry
to manufacture anything approaching the needed quantities of medi-
cines, medical equipment, chemicals, and disinfectants.

1. Basic Food Crops. The provinces of Oriente and Camaguey are
the agricultural heart of Cuba, and the food crops in them received
a heavy blow from Flora. The rice crop, a basic component of the
Cuban diet, was entering its harvesting period. It is likely that about
half the winter rice crop in Oriente and Camaguey was destroyed; this
would mean a loss of about 40,000 metric tons of milled rice, ie., 25
percent of annual production or 12 percent of the island’s annual con-
sumption.

8. Beans, Cuba’s main staple vegetable, also suffered severe damage
from Flora especially in the area around Holguin, one of the hardest
hit areas as well as one of the major bean producing centers. The
Cuban Government has estimated that 19,000 metric tons—nearly 10

* Flora struck and restruck Cuba for five days (5-9 October). Its main impact
was on Oriente province and the eastern part of Camaguey. Wind velocity near
the storm center exceeded 85 miles per hour and at times reached 120. More
than 40 inches of rain fell in parts of Oriente, causing severe floods in several
major river valleys.

f

whee
Page-8
S! T

Percent of total production—of corn may have been lost. Both the
banana and orange producing areas were Severely hit by the storm; the
bulk of these crops has probably been lost.

9. Sugar. Together Oriente and Camaguey contain over 50 Percent
of the sugar cane area in Cuba. Wind and flood damage has been sub-
stantial; the extent of the latter will not be fully known for some wéeks or
months, Possibly not until the sugar harvest next spring. On the basis
of the present tentative evidence we estimate that the total reduction
in the 1964 sugar harvest resulting from cane damage may amount to
about 10 percent of the previously estimated crop, or about 400,000
metric tons. Other effects of Flora—on transportation and on the
availability of labor, for example—may cause a significant additional
shortfall in the amount of Sugar available for export in 1964. Thus
total losses may Tange as high as 15 percent. Moreover, much of the
cane recently planted for initial harvesting in 1965 was washed out.
(A period of approximately 12-18 months is required for cane plantings
to reach maturity.) It is unlikely that much of this area can be re-
planted in time for the 1965 harvest.

10. Other Crops. Cuba normally produces enough coffee for its own
requirements and almost 90 percent comes from Oriente. The coffee
harvest was Partially completed when Flora struck. Perhaps 9,000
metric tons or 25 percent of the total crop was destroyed by the storm.
It is also likely that much of Cuba’s small cacao crop was lost. Oriente
accounts for about 50 percent of Cuba’s cotton production, and about
half of this crop was lost. The loss amounts to about 1,000 metric tons
or about 6 percent of Cuba’s annual consumption. The only major
crop which did not suffer significant damage was tobacco; it is grown
primarily in the western provinces.

11. Livestock. Oriente and Camaguey also contain about half Cuba’s
cattle population. The number drowned in the floods caused by Flora
was probably less than one percent of the total on the island. Losses
among other livestock such as swine and poultry were almost certainly
much higher. If adequate measures are not taken to prevent the
spread of livestock diseases or if sufficient feed grains are not made
available, losses will run higher. In any event, the meat shortage is
likely to become worse.

12. Housing and Personal Property. There has been a heavy loss of
homes and personal Property in Oriente and Camaguey. Castro has
reported that the regime’s tabulation for Oriente as of 20 October was
over 11,000 houses destroyed and 21,000 damaged. The damage in
Camaguey was considerably less,

13. Transportation and Communications. Aside from agriculture,
the transportation sector of the economy sustained the most serious

$s T 5
Page-9
4

losses. Virtually all of the reported damage to land transportation
has been in Oriente. Floods and landslides have rendered many high-
ways and railroads impassable, and segments of them as well as many
bridges have been washed out. A number of landlines were knocked
out, and the Cuban microwave communications system between San-
tiago de Cuba and Havana was temporarily inoperable. The transpor-
tation system in Eastern Cuba is being restored, although full repair

may take a year or more. Temporary structures can be employed in _

most cases where washouts have occurred. Furthermore, much of the
damage was on secondary sections of the highway and railroad systems.

14. Industry. Industrial facilities, including electric power plants and
power lines, do not appear to have been seriously harmed. A number
of facilities, including some sugar mills, did suffer varying degrees of
damage from wind and water. Although some replacement parts will
be difficult to obtain, we believe that most damage can be repaired with-
out lengthy interruption of operations. Nickel and manganese mining
areas were badly damaged by flooding, and some time is required to
pump out the mines and to dry and repair the equipment.

15. Military. Damage to Cuban military installations and equip-
ment resulted in no more than temporary inconvenience. Communica-
tions were cut off, tents, barracks, and storage facilities were damaged
or destroyed, and there were some losses of ammunition, light artillery,
and electronics gear. No aircraft or naval vessels are known to have
been lost, however, and there apparently have been only a few casualties
among military personnel. A few Soviet SAM sites and other installa-
tions suffered minor damage. Much Cuban military equipment and
supplies—food and clothing, vehicles, cranes, bridging equipment, heli-
copters, naval vessels—and many military personnel have been diverted
to hurricane relief and rescue work and will probably be employed in
Tepair and reconstruction operations for some months to come.

Ill. ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES

16. Emergency Measures. Over the next few months the Cuban
regime will be forced to focus its attention on recovery and reconstruc-
tion. Food, medicines, and other supplies will have to be obtained and
distributed; damages will have to be repaired; people will have to be
fed, clothed, and resettled; crops will have to be harvested; replanting
will have to be accomplished. These problems are not insurmountable,
but they will divert needed manpower and resources from other pro-
ductive activity.

17. The regime has undertaken several programs to meet the prob-
lems created by Flora; accompanying all of these have been appeals to

6 Sf

whee
Page-10
pf

rally to the fatherland in this time of disaster. Farmers have been
told to salvage and clear what is left of the ruined crops and then
replant, placing special emphasis upon food crops and sugar. “Volun-
teer” work brigades have been formed to help in the stricken provinces.
Throughout the labor force, the work-week and work-day have been
extended without any increase in wages. Castro has announced sharp
increases in the prices of first-class meat, poultry, beer, and cigars.

18. Rationing quotas on shoes and a few food items have been re-
duced. For example, the meat ration has been cut by 50 percent even
though it was already down to 12 ounces of meat per week and one
small chicken per month. For the first time in Cuban history sugar
is being rationed. As relief supplies promised by the Communist States
and several non-Communist countries arrive in quantity, some of the
pressure to conserve foodstuffs and other supplies can be reduced if
the regime chooses to do so.

19. Economie Prognosis. The most important consequences of Flora
have been to exacerbate the already serious economic problems of the
Cuban regime. Shortages and tighter rationing will probably continue
for at least another year and quite possibly beyond. In its attempts to
increase industrial and agricultural productivity, the regime will prob-
ably use more coercion: Wages may be frozen; work-norms introduced;
the longer work-week may be kept in effect; agricultural policy may
become steadily tougher.

20. It is clear that the effects of Hurricane Flora were greatest upon
the local food supply and the balance of payments problem. While the
impact of the storm will hurt, the economy can probably absorb the
shortrun effects without intolerable strain. To import foods and fibers
to replace those lost in the storm would cost about $35 million. Some of
this will be covered by gifts, and the Castro regime still has modest
holdings of foreign exchange resulting from high prices for 1963 sugar
exports.

21. The regime had hoped to halt the three year decline in agricul-
tural production in 1964 and to achieve a somewhat higher 1964 sugar
crop volume. The winds and floods of Flora have demolished these
hopes and, because of damage to new cane plantings, have also dimmed
Prospects for substantially higher volumes in 1965. Prior to Flora
it seemed likely that the regime might be able to take advantage of rising
world market sugar prices (the spot price was nine cents per pound
on 3 October and is now twelve cents) and a probable small increase
over its 1963 crop of some 3.8 million metric tons to increase export
earnings by perhaps 20 percent or about $100 million in 1964, Now, the
regime will not be able to increase the volume of sugar exports in 1964,

~f 7
Page-11
ft

but it may still exceed 1963 foreign exchange earnings ($450-500 mil-
lion) if higher sugar prices hold—as now seems likely.*

22. Full repair of all damage from the hurricane and full restoration
of agricultural production will probably take several years. Domestic
consumption will be reduced and foreign exchange will be drawn down
to pay for imported foodstuffs, seed grains, and other supplies needed
for reconstruction. At the same time, new investment will be re-

stricted during the next year or two by the economic costs of recon-

struction, including the diversion—and Probable uneconomic use—of
skilled manpower, materials, and equipment. Economic development
will be retarded unless there is an increase in Soviet Bloc assistance.

IV. BLOC AID

23. Background, Bloc development credits extended to Cuba since
Castro took power have totaled nearly $500 million, of which perhaps
20 percent has been expended. These credits are important for Cuba’s
economic future, but of greater immediate importance has been Bloc
Willingness to supply about 85 percent of Cuban import needs, even
though the island’s export capability is severely limited. In 1962 the
total cost of Bloc economic support to Cuba is estimated to have been
about $340 million. Cuba, however, involves other costs impossible
to measure in dollar terms. For example, certain foodstuffs, consumer
goods, raw materials, and machinery have been shipped to Cuba even
when these items are scarce within the Bloc.

24. There were no announcements of new Soviet aid programs during
Castro’s long visit to the USSR last Spring. In fact, there have been
signs of a growing irritation on the part of Soviet and satellite countries
over the waste involved in Cuban use of their assistance. There have
been press reports that at the recent CEMA conferences the Cubans
requested substantial new economic aid and were rebuffed. These re-
ports have not been confirmed, but we believe the Bloc governments
are anxious to avoid increased commitments to Cuba.

25. Nevertheless, the Soviet Bloc has responded to Cuban appeals
for emergency supplies with substantial shipments of food, medicines,
and other vitally needed items, and these are now beginning to reach
the stricken areas. The Soviets have also made promises of modest
additional aid of a more permanent nature, eg., building equipment
and supplies, machines, and a house Pprefabricating factory. All of
the European Satellites have promised some emergency supplies. Com-
munist China has already sent some $200,000 worth of medicine and
powdered milk plus a cash gift of an equal amount. It has offered other

* For a more detailed discussion of the prospects for Cuban sugar exports during
1964, see annex, page 11.

8 f*

ahs
Page-12
ff

items including 20,000 tons of Tice, 30,000 tons of wheat and corn, and
@ million pair of rubber shoes. The total magnitude of emergency
aid from the Communist countries will be sizable, but it Probably will
not meet Castro’s expectations nor will it be sufficient to meet fully
the exigencies caused by Flora.

26. Castro will probably press the Soviet Union for substantial eco-
Nomic aid above and beyond disaster relief and those programs already
in being. Disagreement on this issue will add to the strains already
manifest in the relationship between the two governments: It would
become a particularly abrasive factor if the Soviets tried to use the
leverage provided by the urgency of Cuba’s needs to attach political
conditions to the provision of aid. For example, the Soviets would
like Castro to align himself with their policy on the test ban treaty and
East-West detente. They would like to have him stop competing with
other Latin American Communist lJeaders and start exercising more
caution in his revolutionary incitements. And they would probably
like to see their aid program in Cuba placed under closer Soviet
supervision.

27. Imposition of such political conditions would be unpalatable to
Castro, and we do not think he would consider accepting any of them
unless his economic straits had become more desperate than they now
appear to be. He might make some temporary concessions of a pro
forma character in order to acquire quickly some especially needed eco-
nomic assistance. We believe that, although the Soviets might seek
to acquire assurances on certain points, they would be unlikely to press
so hard as to threaten a break in their relationship with Cuba. Thus,
we conclude that the Soviets will not give Castro all the assistance he
desires, but that they probably will continue to provide regular aid at
approximately the current level along with emergency assistance.

V. POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES

28. The economic problems exacerbated by Flora, and the belt-tighten-
ing measures which the regime is imposing upon the population, will
almost certainly further erode Castro’s personal Popularity. For the
immediate future (the next two or three months), Castro will probably
succeed in rallying most Cubans to special efforts and to acceptance
of unusual hardships to meet the hurricane’s devastation. As time.
Passes, however, his exhortations will begin to wear thin. Shortages
of goods, the continuation of depressed living conditions, and the regime’s
resort to draconian measures will alienate an increasing part of the
citizenry. Even so, unless major dissidence develops within the military
establishment, Castro and the minority wedded to him will probably
be able to maintain control.
Page-13
10

f

29. In any event, we believe Castro will not reduce to any significant
degree his incitement of subversion in Latin America. He remains first
of all a revolutionary, and any increase in internal pressures might even
encourage him to intensify agitation. We doubt that he will make any
genuine efforts to improve relations with the US; indeed he is likely

to make more and more use of the Yankee whipping boy as his difficulties
grow within Cuba.

nts
Page-14
SE

ANNEX

 

PROSPECTS FOR CUBAN SUGAR EXPORTS DURING 1964

The Cuban sugar crop for 1964 is estimated at 3.5 million tons which
would produce an exportable surplus of about 3.0 million tons, It is not
yet clear how this surplus will be divided between Bloc and free“ world
markets. Cuba is now negotiating its 1964 trade Protocols with the

are signed. On the basis of the history of the Past several years, however.
it seems likely that Cuba will export about one million tons to the
free world during 1964, with the other two million tons going to the Bloc.

CUBAN SUGAR EXPORTS

 

 

1960-1963
(in thousands of metric tons)
1960 1961 1962 1963 (est *)
USSR ww... feet eeeeee - 1,577 3,303 2,112 1,200
European Satellites... . 7215 456 615 500
Communist China... wee 550 1,064 962 500
Total Bloc ...... . . 2,842 4,823 3,689 2,200
Free World .... : 3,278 1,587 1,441 1,200
Grand Total -- 5,620" 6,410 5,130 3,400

 

 

* While the figures for 1963 are estimates they are now supported by a con-
siderable body of evidence and appear to be reasonably accurate.

As of mid-October, Cuba had already contracted for a minimum of
465,000 tons of Sugar for delivery during 1964 to Iran, Italy, Japan, the
Middle East, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK. In addition, Cuba has
a long term agreement with Morocco calling for the delivery of 300,000
tons during 1964; however, the Status of this commitment is now in
doubt due to the recent break in relations between the two countries.

Exports to the free world can be expected to sell at about 10 cents
per pound if current world future prices are taken as a guide.

WORLD SUGAR FUTURE PRICES
as of Selected Dates in 1963

   

1964
Contract 2AuG 5 Szpr 30Ocr 12 Nov
January 2... seeee. 6.79 6.6 8.8 11.90
March .. oe 6.10 745 9.12 10.72
July .... 6.00 6.35 9.10 10.35
September .___. 5.82 6.10 8.88 9.82

 

SHMPRET n
Page-15
At this price, one million tons would be worth $220 million. There is
no evidence that Bloc prices will be increased above the 6 cents per
pound set in mid-1963; two million tons sold to the Bloc at this price
would be valued at about $265 million. Therefore, under these assump-
tions, Cuban export earnings from sugar alone would amount to $485
million compared to about $400 million during 1963. Total earnings
from exports during 1964 might thus be $530 to 580 million compared
to the $450 to $500 million estimated for 1963.

12 $s T

alte
Page-16
SE

ET
Page-17
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE...

   

-_1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy

‘ - is for the information and use of the recipient and of Persoris under his jurisdictiori-on a
. need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may’ be authorized by the
* following officials within their respective departments: * ~

@. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for ‘the Office of the Secretary of
Defense > SEL AIS es .

& Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Departm
Department of the Army... “ET

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence),
Navy tee gl etuen

. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Force my S “te

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency e * fon

of the Army, for the

   

for the Department of the

 

‘USAF, for the Department of the Air

 

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA. ©. +. - -

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2,
22 June 1953,

4, The title is document when used separately from the text should be classified:
FOR omg on ae.

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation