
Page-1
COPY NO.90

FOR THE ASSISTANT ULKECTOR
FOR REPORTS AND ESTLYATES
. CIA
A

THE PROBABLE EFFECTS
OF POSTPONEMENT OF THE
ITALIAN COLONIES QUESTION

 

ORE 61-48

Published 2 November 1948 f°) yp UP RO

 

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE iN FULL

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army
. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy
. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

- Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

ese Rag

>

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CLA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council

National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Research and Development Board

SBERET
Page-3
ORE 61-48 : SEC

THE PROBABLE EFFECTS OF POSTPONEMENT
OF THE ITALIAN COLONIES QUESTION

SUMMARY

This study assumes United Nations General Assembly postponement for one year
of a decision on the disposition of Libya, northern Eritrea, and possibly Somaliland.
Postponement of itself will probably refiect Assembly inability to agree on either UK
trusteeship for Cyrenaica, Italian trusteeship over its former colonies (except perhaps
Somaliland), direct UN trusteeship, or independence—all of which will probably be
aired in the present GA. The resulting deadlock would lead to postponement of the
issue until the next Assembly session.

The general effect of postponement will be to promote, during the ensuing year, a
welter of propaganda, conflicting claims, and international lobbying, as Italy, the
colonial populations, and other interested states build up their cases in preparation
for the 1949 Assembly. While it is impossible to predict accurately the final UN de-
cision, postponement will increase the likelihood that either independence (perhaps
after an interim UN trusteeship in the case of the less-developed colonies) or a com-
promise combination of one-power trusteeships will be the final solution.

Postponement is likely to result in increased sentiment favoring independence,
particularly for Libya, the most highly developed of the three colonies. The colonial
nationalist movements would have a year in which to demonstrate their strength, and
native leaders, seizing upon postponement as an indication of indecision, would probably
utilize the period to strengthen local aspirations for independence. Many UN mem-
bers—such as the Arab states, the Asiatic nations, and some Latin American countries—
which are anti-colonial in outlook, would thereby be encouraged to vote for indepen-
dence. Should strong pressure for independence develop, the Soviet bloc, too, might
switch to this policy in order to curry favor with the anti-colonial powers and block
strategic use of the colonies by the US and UK.

The current Soviet proposal for direct UN trusteeship with a seven-power advisory
council might also have substantial appeal to those favoring independence because it
avoids placing the colonies under any one state, provides for their independence within
a specified period, and permits most of the interested nations some voice in their ad-
ministration. Many UN members might find such a proposal, perhaps modified to bar
Soviet participation, more desirable for the less-developed colonies of Eritrea and
Somaliland. Italy and the Arab states might favor direct UN trusteeship provided they
could participate.

Note: The information in this report is as of 15 October 1948.
The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air Force
have concurred in this report.

1 SEQRET
Page-4
sfl

The lobbying by the interested powers which would undoubtedly take place during
the interim period would probably tend toward a compromise solution. The US, UK,
France, Italy, and the Arab states, sensing that their preferred solutions had little
chance of being accepted, might seek some “behind-the-scenes” agreement aimed toward
securing sufficient GA votes to support their minimum aspirations. For example, the
three Western Powers might offer their support of Italian claims to Somaliland and
Tripolitania in exchange for Italian espousal of UK trusteeship over Cyrenaica and
French trusteeship over the Fezzan. The Arab states, fearful that Libyan indepen-
dence is unattainable, reportedly would compromise on UK trusteeship over all Libya,
but such a solution would cause a most unfavorable reaction in Italy. The Arab votes
gained would also be offset by the probable loss of Italian-influenced Latin American
votes. In any case, assuming delay and barring unforeseen developments, the prevail-
ing anti-colonial sentiment among numerous UN members will make difficult Assembly
approval of any one-power trusteeships.

For Italy, postponement and any of its probable aftermaths would mean great dis-
appointment. Although the Government, in view of its recent loss of Soviet support,
now favors postponement on all but Somaliland, the public would be bitter over any
further delay. Even should Somaliland be returned, this feeling would be only partly
assuaged. Furthermore, should Italian claims to Libya and Eritrea again be advanced,
this time before the current GA, failure to acquire these areas would convince many
Italians that they lack real support from the Western Powers. If approval of Italian
trusteeships appeared unlikely, the Government might shift to a direct UN trusteeship,
which would provide Italy with at least a voice in an advisory council, or to some form
of multilateral trusteeship with Italy as one of the trustee powers. These solutions
would better save Italian face than loss of its former colonies to another power and
would enable Italy to protect the Italian settlers who would be at the mercy of native
elements under an independent regime.

Should the proposal for a UK trusteeship over Cyrenaica—strategically desirable to
the US and UK—be disapproved by the present Assembly, it would have no better chance
of acceptance at a later meeting unless some compromise arrangement to secure the
necessary votes were worked out in the interim, or unless UN members became So fearful
of Soviet aggressive intentions that they would favor direct strengthening of the West-
ern military position.

The probable willingness of the Cyrenaican leader, Sayid Idris, to accept treaty
relations with the British in case Cyrenaica is made independent might make inde-
pendence an acceptable alternative to UK trusteeship from a US-UK point of view.
Under such circumstances, independence would at least be a lesser evil than a collective
trusteeship in which the USSR participated.

afer 2
Page-5
flor

THE PROBABLE EFFECTS OF POSTPONEMENT
OF THE ITALIAN COLONIES QUESTION

This study assumes UN General Assembly postponement for one year of a decision
on the disposition of Libya, northern Eritrea, and possibly Somaliland. Although it
is by no means certain that the Assembly will agree on postponement, such a develop-
ment seems likely if pressed by the US, UK, and France.

Postponement would, however, probably be preceded by a heated debate, with the
presentation of several alternative solutions ranging from Italian trusteeship to inde-
pendence. Such debate appears unavoidable, since various interested states will un-
doubtedly insist on proposing their favored solutions. Libya, the most important of
the three colonies, will be the chief bone of contention. The USSR probably will pre-
sent its recent plan for direct UN trusteeship under the Trusteeship Council for all
three colonies, while some UN member, such as Argentina, may counter by proposing
Italian trusteeships. The Arab states will doubtless urge immediate Libyan indepen-
dence. The UK intends to seek a trusteeship over Cyrenaica. It seems unlikely that
enough votes could be secured to carry any one of these proposals, thus leaving final
agreement on postponement, at least on Libya and northern Eritrea, the most probable
solution. (There appears to be general agreement that some part of Eritrea should go
to Ethiopia in compensation for the Italo-Ethiopian war.) Since the colonies question
will come up late in the Assembly, the extent of discussion will also be limited by the
length of the debate on preceding items. Should a bitter and protracted session occur
over such issues as Berlin, Palestine, and Korea, the weary delegates would be more
favorably disposed toward postponement in order to avoid additional wrangling and
to hasten adjournment.

Agreement may well be achieved on Italian trusteeship for Somaliland, the least
controversial of the three colonies, at the coming session. Many European and Latin
American states, as well as the US, UK, and France, favor Italian trusteeship, and even
the USSR, which once shared this view, may agree in order to gain a favorable Italian
reaction. On the other hand, some nations might withhold final agreement on Somali-
land to permit bargaining when the other colonies come up for discussion.

The effect of the initial GA debate will be to indicate the various alternative pos-
sibilities both to the native leaders involved and to the UN members with whom the
final decision rests. Removal of the issue from the closed meetings of the Foreign
Ministers and their Deputies to the open forum of the UN will focus world attention on
the problem, and the various interested parties will then be able to gauge the relative

3 softer
Page-6
safer

acceptability of each of the possible solutions. Postponement at this juncture would
allow full latitude for conflicting interests and propaganda claims to come into play
as each side sought to use the year’s delay to influence the final UN decision. These
efforts would be accentuated if the GA were to send an investigating commission to the
three areas. The probable results of this situation upon each of the major factors in
the colonies issue are discussed below.

1, Errect on Soviet Pouicy.

Postponement would give the USSR an opportunity to propagandize for some
speciously reasonable solution like that proposed by Vishinsky in the Council of Foreign
Ministers. Previously the USSR had called for the return to Italy of all its former Afri-
can colonies under a UN trusteeship. The Kremlin, apparently appreciating that this
would obtain only negligible long-term results in Italy, subsequently brought forward a
plan for the eventual independence of the colonies following an intermediate direct UN
trusteeship with an advisory council in which the USSR would participate. Soviet
propagandists will no doubt make political capital of the fact that this idea is similar
to one advanced by the US in 1945. The new Soviet proposal is obviously designed to
block strategic use of the colonies by the US and the UK and to secure USSR participa-
tion in their administration. Moreover, since it specifies independence for Eritrea and
Libya after a definite interim period, it would have some appeal to those favoring in-
dependence.

If it should become apparent that the administrative impracticality of such a
trusteeship makes GA approval unlikely, the USSR might feel that its objective of
denying strategic areas to the US and UK could best be served if it proposed, or at least
supported, independence. In such a case, Soviet and Communist propaganda would
portray the USSR as a leader for the freedom of an Arab and colonial people, concur-
rently emphasizing that the US and UK, in blocking independence, were denying free-
dom to such people. Thus by again changing its policy, the Soviet Union might in-
crease its standing with the Arab world and with colonial peoples in general and, if the
US and UK clung to postponement, might provide itself with excellent propaganda
material to damage Anglo-American prestige in colonial and former colonial areas.

2. IvaLIan REACTION To POSTPONEMENT.

Italian public opinion, already bitter over the colonies issue, will be exacerbated
by postponement, particularly if the likelihood of an unfavorable solution is indicated
by the initial GA debate. Return of Somaliland would, however, somewhat assuage
Italian bitterness. Had the USSR not abandoned its support for Italian trusteeship, a
UN vote to delay the disposition of Eritrea and Libya would have evoked vigorous pro-

sng 1 4
Page-7
softer

test from both the Government and the public, with adverse reaction against those who
supported such a motion. Now, however, Soviet adherence to direct UN trusteeship
has caused the Italian Government, in an attempt to forestall an unfavorable disposi-
tion, to favor postponement on Libya and Eritrea, though urging the immediate return
of Somaliland. The new Soviet plan also eliminates the possibility of increased pres-
tige anticipated by the Italian Communists as a result of western opposition to the
return of Eritrea and Libya.

Though encouraged somewhat by the probable return of Somaliland, public feel-
ing will nevertheless run high over further prolongation of the dispute and the pos-
sibility of a loss of areas whose acquisition predated the fascism for which Italy is being
penalized. Apparently the Italians are more or less resigned to the possible loss of
Cyrenaica, but aspirations regarding Tripolitania have been kept at fever pitch. If
ultimate trusteeship over even Tripolitania should be denied Italy, public bitterness
will be acute. Italians would be less bitter, however, over US trusteeship for Libya
than over that of any other power and might, indeed, believe that their own security
would be strengthened by the presence of US forces in the Mediterranean.

Italian policy during the interim period will be to seek, by all possible means, to
influence a UN vote favorable to its interests. This lobbying will be most effective
among the Latin American states, many of which, because of their large Italian popu-
lations and sympathy toward another Latin country, already favor Italian claims.
Since the Government recognizes that the return of all three colonies is unlikely, it
may seek some compromise arrangement with the Western Powers under which they
would support Italian claims to Somaliland and Tripolitania in return for Italian
support of British and French trusteeships over Cyrenaica and the Fezzan respectively.
On the other hand, Italy is reportedly seeking Arab state support for an Italian trustee-
ship over Libya in return for a guarantee to grant it independence after one year.

Italian public opinion would be very unfavorable toward UK trusteeship for all
Libya. To avoid any such plan, the Government might favor a direct UN trusteeship
for Libya and Eritrea in which Italy would have a voice, or even a multiple trusteeship
by Italy and other interested states. At the very minimum, were Libyan independence
likely, Italy would seek protection for Italian settlers, assurances of limited immigra-
tion, and a guarantee of economic development privileges. Either of the latter courses
would better ameliorate Italian public opinion than loss of Eritrea or Libya to other
powers and would better enable Italy to save face.

Italians consider Italy disarmed by the Peace Treaty in the face of two powerful
and unpredictable forces, both of which will put strategic interests before Italy’s wel-
fare whether in the disposition of the colonies or in the prosecution of a European war.
Since controversy over the colonial issue has led some members of the Government to
question the desirability of any political or military alliances with the Western Powers,

5 segfles
Page-8
sgn

Soviet support of Italian trusteeship would have been extremely embarrassing to the
present Italian Government in its efforts to cooperate with the West at a time when such
cooperation is important to the successful implementation of the ERP and to develop-
ment of a united Western Europe. The Soviet switch to direct UN trusteeship has less-
ened the Government's dilemma. Even so, were a markedly unfavorable UN decision on
the Italian colonies to appear to be in the offing, the belief that advantage could be
gained from strict neutrality in the face of increased pressures from East and West
would gain ground among the Italian people.

3. REACTION IN THE COLONIES,

One likely effect of postponement will be to increase local sentiment for independ-
ence in Libya and to a lesser degree in Somaliland, particularly should the inhabitants
see from the initial GA debates the possibility of a favorable vote for such a solution.
Postponement for one year would ‘allow time for this sentiment to expand and for
other interested parties, like the Arab states, to propagandize in its favor. If the
UN were to call for plebiscites, the local inhabitants would probably favor independence,
except in Eritrea where the demand for union with Ethiopia might overbalance such
sentiment. Should immediate independence seem unattainable, some native groups
might see merit in the latest Soviet proposal since it specifies eventual independence.

Postponement might lead to some disturbances in Eritrea and possibly in Tripoli-
tania. The extent of the disturbances in Eritrea, where the pro-Ethiopian Unionist
Party is strongly organized and active, would depend upon Ethiopian satisfaction with
the portion of Eritrea it received. Should the UN debate indicate possible return of
these areas to Italy, serious disturbances might occur in all three colonies because prac-
tically all the populations are anti-Italian.

In Eritrea, the Unionist Party, composed mostly of Coptic Christians, favors union
with Ethiopia. Although the present GA will probably transfer at least the Danakil
coast to Ethiopia, the Unionists will agitate for transfer of all Eritrea or, at a minimum,
the inland plateau region. Their activities in this respect will be largely determined by
the degree of direct incitement from Addis Ababa. The Moslem League favors Eritrean
independence or, if this is not immediately possible, UK trusteeship. Lesser groups
either favor UN trusteeship if independence is not possible or ask directly for Italian
or UK trusteeship. The Foreign Ministers’ Investigating Commission found strong
anti-Ethiopian sentiment among the Moslem, pro-Italian Danakil tribesmen in the
South, around Assab, but they are not very articulate politically.

Should the GA postpone the disposition of Italian Somaliland. rather than voting
to return the colony to Italy, the effect on the native population would not be great.
Difficulty with the strongly anti-Italian Somali Youth League, however, may be antici-

softer 6
Page-9
sigfler

pated in either case. The League, the most articulate local group, is seeking an inde-
pendent Somalia involving the union of all the East African Somali tribes, or, barring
that, a four-power UN trusteeship with independence after ten years,

In Libya, postponement would give an impetus to present extensive nationalistic
tendencies. Native opinion in both Cyrenaica and Tripolitania favors independence
and local leaders will undoubtedly seize all opportunities to press their advantage. Any
indication of Italy’s possible return would lead to prompt and bitter local reactions,
including anti-Italian riots. In Cyrenaica, the Senussi tribes—comprising ninety-
five percent of the population—will support any decision made by their leader Sayid
Idris. While Idris himself prefers an independent Emirate with UK advisers, he will
doubtless accept a temporary UK trusteeship. Should this appear unattainable, how-
ever, the Emir would certainly seek immediate independence. He would not favor
any direct UN trusteeship in which Italy and the USSR participated.

Tripolitanian sentiment for independence has also been growing, and further lati-
tude for its development would be afforded by a year’s postponement. The National
Council for the Liberation of Libya, led by Beshir Saadawi and reflecting the views of
a substantial majority of the people, favors a united Libya. While it would accept the
personal leadership of Sayid Idris, it is unwilling to support an hereditary dynasty as
the Senussi insist. The Arab League supports Saadawi's proposal. Tripolitanian
Arabs will be no more anxious than the Cyrenaicans for a direct UN trusteeship and
will propagandize for a united independent Libya.

4. REACTION IN NEIGHBORING STATES.

Although the Arab League, embroiled in Palestine, has been unable to devote
much attention to the Italian colonies problem, its component states strongly favor
independence for both Eritrea and a united Libya. Consequently if they see in post-
ponement a blow to these aspirations, a loud vocal reaction—including fiery speeches,
bitter press comment, and League resolutions—will inevitably follow. Actual dis-
turbances might occur in Egypt, since Cairo has been the center of agitation for Libyan
independence and Egypt is more interested in neighboring Libya than are the other
Arab states. Following hard on the heels of the Palestine dispute, a denial of self-
determination to the Libyans would strengthen antagonism toward western
“imperialism.”

There have been indications, however, that, fearful of an adverse UN agreement
on Libya, the Arab states are slowly shifting in favor of a UK trusteeship for the entire
colony. Although preferring immediate independence, they apparently might accept
UK trusteeship as the only practical alternative which would eventually lead to inde-
pendence and yet forestall some unfavorable settlement such as division of the territory

7 s ET
Page-10
and Italian return to Tripolitania. The most immediately interested state, Egypt,
now reportedly favors postponement to avoid some such solution. The Arabs also
might seek to trade their support for Italian trusteeship for Somaliland and northern
Eritrea for Italian-influenced support on independence for Libya.

Aside from issuing strongly worded resolutions condemning the denial of imme-
diate independence to Libya and perhaps attempting to incite the North African Mos-
lems to demonstrations of violence, it is not anticipated that further action will be
undertaken by the League itself. Increasing dissensions within the League and pre-
occupation with the Palestine problem make it rather improbable that the states con-
cerned would feel in a position to take positive steps to further the cause of Libyan
independence. Should the Palestine dispute die down, however, the Arab states would
turn their attention increasingly toward Libya and would utilize a year’s postpone-
ment to lobby for independence or for some compromise which would eventually assure
this goal.

Ethiopian bitterness may be anticipated if postponement is approved for the
whole of Eritrea. Ultimate cession of at least the southern areas seems assured, how-
ever. If unsatisfied by the UN decision, the Ethiopian Government will doubtless make
a formal protest, accompanied by reiteration of previous claims, while simultaneously
directing the “spontaneous” demonstrations of Eritrean Unionists.

5. Errects on US-UK Srratecic REQUIREMENTS.

The UK seeks trusteeship over Cyrenaica for building up a major base to replace
former installations in Egypt and Palestine. While present GA approval of British
trusteeship is by no means assured, a year’s postponement might further reduce the
chances for this desired solution by allowing sentiment for independence for a united
Libya to increase. The UK will, of course, utilize the period to mend its fences locally
and to seek wide UN support, but its efforts will be made more difficult by a strengthen-
ing of nationalist sentiment. Postponement will also increase the financial burden
on the UK, since it will, in that case, continue to administer the colonies. Moreover,

* uncertainty over the eventual disposition of Cyrenaica will make the British, even if
not restrained by the restrictive provisions of the Hague Conventions, hesitate to build
up bases in this area.

Direct US strategic interests in the former Italian colonies include the Mellaha
airfield in Tripoli and the radio facilities at Asmara, Eritrea—both made available by
the UK. Postponement would temporarily extend British control, thus assuring con-
tinued availability of these facilities. Should delay increase the possibility of inde-
pendence or direct UN trusteeship, however, it would militate against long-term reten-
tion of these strategic interests. British loss of Cyrenaica would also lessen the pos-

offner 8
Page-11
SE iT

sibility of US use of the bases there. UK treaty arrangements with an independent
Cyrenaica or Libya along the lines of those with Transjordan might, however, provide
comparable facilities.

6. Errect or PostPONEMENT ON THE 1949 UN Vors.

Although it is impossible to predict, on the basis of the developments outlined
above, how the 1949 General Assembly will vote on the Italian colonies question, cer-
tain generalizations can be made. These predictions must be purely tentative, how-
ever, because the positions of most states are as yet unclear and may furthermore be
subject to change under pressure.

The three basic alternatives before the Assembly will be: (1) independence; (2)
direct UN trusteeship, perhaps with a multi-state advisory council; and (3) a series of
one-power trusteeships (a fourth possibility for Eritrea would be outright cession to
Ethiopia, if not previously done in 1948, perhaps with cession of the western Moslem
area to the Sudan). Yet another possibility would be a multiple trusteeship, such as
a UK-French-Italian-Egyptian trusteeship for Libya, but the administrative impracti-
cality of such a condominium would greatly limit its chances of UN acceptance. It is
by no means certain that any one of these solutions would be approved for all three
colonies. Some combination of them appears more likely.

Insofar as postponement leads to an increase in local sentiment for independence,
particularly in Libya, it is likely to influence the UN vote of the anti-colonial bloc.
Immediate independence would probably be strongly favored only for this colony—
relatively the most advanced. It would most likely be supported by the six Arab
states, seven other Asiatic nations, some Latin American members like Guatemala,
Mexico, and Ecuador, and possibly also by Liberia. The six Slav votes might also be
switched to independence, thus bringing the total to some twenty-three. These states
can block any other solution if they cling to independence. Many of them, however,
should they see the impossibility of securing majority approval, would probably swing
to some other solution, particularly if pressed by the US and UK. The anti-colonial
bloc might urge plebiscites in the colonies, which would have wide UN appeal and
would probably lead to independence, at least for Libya. On the other hand, if the UN
sent out an investigating commission, its report might tend to emphasize the conclu-
sion of the Foreign Ministers’ Commission that none of the colonies is adequately pre-
pared for self-government and hence might recommend that some interim trusteeship
is desirable.

Substantial UN sentiment might develop, particularly among the anti-colonial
bloc, for some form of direct UN trusteeship if independence seemed unattainable.
Such a solution would probably appear more suitable for Eritrea and Somaliland, which

9 SEQRET
Page-12
oof:

are less ripe for self-government. While little more than the six Slav votes would
be forthcoming for the present Soviet-sponsored proposal per se, if it were modified
to exclude Soviet participation in any advisory council and to include other interested
states such as Egypt, it might appeal to many nations which dislike the idea of one-
power trusteeships and which feel the interests of the local inhabitants would be
better protected by the UN.

If, during postponement, the US, UK, France, and Italy could reach some com-
promise agreement on the division of the colonies, it might have a good chance for
securing the necessary two-thirds majority. The Western Powers and Italy could
probably swing the bulk of the Latin bloc, while the Western European states, four
of the British dominions, Ethiopia, Greece, Turkey, and possibly Liberia would likely
extend their support. This would bring the total vote to thirty-six, almost enough for
a majority. Firm opposition from the Slav bloc, the Arab states, the seven anti-
colonial Asiatic nations, and one or two others could block any such solution. The
US and UK, however, might be able to sway the votes of some of these states, such as
China, Iran, Afghanistan, or the Philippines. A provision for independence after a
definite, specified trusteeship period might partially allay the misgivings of these
nations and would probably be sought by them.

On the other hand, should the Western Powers reach an agreement with the Arab
states to back UK trusteeship for all Libya with automatic independence after a cer-
tain period (reportedly favored by the Arab bloc), they could probably marshal a
substantial UN vote for this solution. The Arab bloc, most Western European states,
four British dominions, Ethiopia, Greece, Turkey, and possibly Liberia, Pakistan, Iran,
Afghanistan, and China might be prevailed upon to give their support. Unless the
majority of the anti-colonial Middle and Far Eastern states followed the Arab lead
in supporting this solution, however, the addition of the Arab bloc vote, per se, might
be offset by loss of those Latin American states favoring Italy’s claims to the area.

SEQGRET 10
Page-13
Y24asm

 

. The ated) mae Cora *yo7) is
arden) ae sugelemer yo Ta clove.
eet

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL;

 

anno
Page-14
The

   

(OTA #ELOTD) das supplerient
Page-15
1 TRIPOLITANIA S cans!
- | *CIRENATCA
7 ( ren :

° !

    

FRENCH Wesr

AFRICA ease

4 EQUATORIAL
7

7 AFRICA
f 2
i 5
i ?
7 7 5
SS >

°C

THE FORMER 4

ITALIAN COLONIES — .-~~y
IN AFRICA Xu

  

 

 

ee Taternational boundary 7

fone Rare tthe Chal Adamant oe Bot Sn
A fares 1 ancy o Dis Oocenen 1907

The bowers shown on tha map do mot necestacy coneioond it
A es wo the boxdares meogeited bythe U.S Corserncns

ai

sovece
—— BELGIAN

 

ee rerery

ANGLO-EGYPTIAN

SUDAN

 

CONGO

  
  

setrisn
SOMALILAND

 

NETH OPI A

 

|
>
=!

CIA Reprogucier
Page-16
FFICE

U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING 01
3131—S—1948

 

8S 60 £0 AON B%61

 

3Y0/ 716