
Page-1
' st SK so

oO CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OPFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES |.

oO

é

16 October 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR THE INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SUBURCT: NIB~99: ee! of the World Situation through
1g:

lL On Us October we ciroulated to you a text of NIE=99,
At the request of the JIG representative, the IAC representa-
tives were reconvened to reconsider certain parts of that

text, principally paragraph 18,

x
2. Attached is a revised text which incorporates the changes
agreed to on 16 October,

3. This text supersedes the 1; October text and will be
considered by the IAC at 10:5, Tuesday, 20 October,

4. Because of the necessity for holding a clean-up session
on this timate on 16 October, the Board has not completed

ite discussion on the advisability of a, /
ee :
tion will be sent to you on 19 October, for action on the

27th.

aut te, Bort
PAUL A. BOREL
Deputy Assistant Director

Distribution "4"

B Ruca 6 Charge inditaled by mangune® Crary mening «
Ponte 4 (Primantey franc 16) te mba, Change Oh magitude «

secon, Vt Ran
., 881091322
Page-2
ye

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

16 October 1953

SUBJECT: MIE-99: THE WORLD SITUATION THROUGH 1955
SCOPE

This estimts is concerned with the major international trenis
‘Which vill affect the vorlé situation through 1955 ruther than with :
‘the specific events and conditions whieh will chsracterise thet
situstion, The astimte must ascune @ continuation of present w
Policies ant thus cannot consider the effects viich a change in
these policies vould have on the vorld situation. Whtie-we-fwel

Ahat_an_attompe-mmrt OE ERIE YS Si inata UE fects of the Groth
Of Covtet-caPEUtitttes -for-sortear-werfere-an-the -venid-et tution,
there 4s -at-PEUSENE INVENT WINGS FOr making ouch an estimate,

I 8: Cr 1

a. Despite the change in regime in the USSR ant the shifts
in Soviet foreign and demestio tactics, there hes been no change
in the USSR's basic hostility to all non-Soriet pover. ‘The USER

881091-327,
Page-3
Will continue its cold var against the Free World, largely through
& vigorous politioal varfare campaign. While East-West magotiations
Sv venehls Mhawe Se Liebe 2eanond of Aor mafer Sérjat ecmeentens
em 7 tae tig sd fbi"
ee Sty ve bate ‘tnt i, datsnere ti ietntton
Zt ware ar Grartag thts period, ant, 0 the axtext that
te Wm purrs « mare cautious policy, tha clasor of war by aia
calculation will also probably be less. Sowever, there vill be con- -
timing Ganger thet it my oscur frome series of actions and
counteractinns initiated by either side, but act intended by either
eide to have that result. Ip pertieular it might arise from actions
by one side that were reganied by the other as an iumineat threat to its
security ct’ We ded to
neut_Loen) mt dtery-tgspeasion. Site ore wit te 0 ecctimat
danger of safes Iart-tiost clashes, yarticularly in Indochina,
Korea, ant Oermany.

 

3c In the absence of such mew Enst-West clashes, ani unless the
USSE abentons its ostensibly concilistory tactics, the next two years
Will probably be @ period of reduced Free World apprehensions of general
var. So long as this period lasts it vill present @ nev challenge to
‘the Free World. While over the longer run the very diversity of the

881091 Day
Page-4
ea

Free Worl my lent it o flexibility ani potential for grovth vhich
W111 constitute a scuree of strength, over the next to years this
Qiversity my prove © source of veakness, The totalitarian nature and
centralized controls of the Soviet Ble might give it advantages in
this phase of the cold war, even though the totalitarian rigitities of
te Roo systen might over the longer run impair its stability ent
ecbasion. Continued stresses end strains within the Soviet Bloc are
Miely, but the monolithic unity ant forced eobeston of the Bloc vill
frobably be much less affected by a situation of redused apprehensions
then the more divided Free World. doreower, the builds of Blo

: . steength vill alacst oerteinly continue, even if at a scuevhet reduced

a rate, vitle the Free Vorlé my be inclined to relax its gard. We
beldeve tint ina sitimtion of redused internation? syprebensions
and Bloc emphasis on divisive tactics, thare 1s danger of a watening
“fn the unity of the Free World. ,

(Frenchy fperw: 1) 4, The progress being made by the USSR in the develoyment of
auoleur weapons 1s also a factor of prime military antl psychological

importance in the vorld situation. [aoriet deweloment of nuclear

vebbons ant_mnns_ot-teitvery-to-eyriching © stage Is WEIEH the
USSR_wi11_bave-the-sapabtitty-to-S8 Er Ettacky whieh; “tf Wri vered

: -3-

 

8810 91 325- _
Page-5
oa

 

target, vould festroy « ler; g ‘ fal,
; mgni-
rales] As this soviet capability tnereasee, Nestern supertority in

 

 

 

. Nevberbetarep, (ae the TEER

increases ite capebilities vetting a telly anmsine rut
on the US, the US is losing 1 RSET hs sae te ae a
West struggle. ‘The full inact of this development is not yet clear,

but even nov ve perceive two new elements:
e
&- ne is the danger that the USSR my use threats of atomic

Dosbarinent against certain Free World countries in an
‘sttempt to force their ecmpliance vith its dennis. There
is a chance thst scme_US allies, if they feared that the
threat of US retaliation would not deter Soviet action,
vould be foreed by the prospect of atomic devastaticn to
S4opt more neutral positions in a cold, or especially in

 

a hot, wr.

88109124 -

Laer
Page-6
vb. In an age vbere initial air assault oan be so destructive,
‘the US is losing, if it bas not already lost, the imaense

stratagte sdvantages of being able to contuat a deliberate
end extensive post Deday mobilisation with Pelative freedon

from enemy attack.

8 Of ung w ospabilities
s weapons may veaken e

TX. FROBAMIZ TRENDS IN SOVIET BLOC CCRESTCH, STRENITH, AMD POLICTES

5+ Sobesion of the Bloc. Despite the evidence of/populer

disaffection within the Satellites ant the Possibility Se « disruptive
strugele for yover within the nev Kremlin lesdershty, ve believe

the Bloc will preserve tts cohesion through the period of this estimte,
anf that the Kremlin will contimus to play the dominant role in the
forwlation Of Bloc policies. We believe that common mterted-trtesests

ty to Pp the USSR ant
RAR ew
as Closely allied, | at meted

a

 

881091777
Page-7
6. Blos Cersbilitios. ‘The build-up of Bloc basic iniustry and
wilitary capabilities will continue even though incrwased attention
Will be devoted to the correction of certain econcate deficiencies
in egriculture and consumer industries vhich recently have been
specially emphasised. There are indications that the Soviet authorities
intend to proceed along the lines la{d out in the announced plans
for these sectors of the economy, This vould require an allocation of
Greeter resources to agriculture! end ecommer goods production ant,
at least for the short run, would lead to @ reduction in the rate of
expension of other sectors of the economy.

1s The not significant toerenss tn Bloc uilitery onpabtiities
during the period of this estimte arise z the a
Mise teigtia of mutaes eat ho tet dear ae ,
Of its Set atrereft ant its suearines. The Bloc my,by mid-1955 bave
evaileble's sufficient number of heavy beubers to increase greatly
its long-range air offensive capebilities. The Bloc vill probebly in- ~
crease its air defense cepebilities, ani my heve a limited maber of
Sli-weatber jet interceptors in operstional units. We do not believe
thet marked cbonges in Bloc militery strength apd cepsbilities are likely
to ceour in other respects; however, there will be s general taprovenent
in training ant equipment of Bloe armed forces.

-6°

8810 91-727
Page-8
ae

8. Bice political varfare capabilities, through exploitation of
Western political and econonic vulnerabilities, encouragement of enti.
Westernism ani ntionalism in underdeveloped eountries, ani utilisation
Of the world-vide network of Communist parties, vill resein great.

9. Probable Bloc Poltetas.” Wo bellave tlat the Communist

wulers remain profoundly convinced thet permanent hostility exists
between the Communist and the free vorlds. ‘Their basic cbjectives,
therefore, contime to be an expansion of their ovn sphere of pwer
and the eventual domination of the non-Communist world.

10. We delieve that during the period of this eatinate Bloc
lesders vill try to avold courses of sction which in thetr juiguest
might involve substentiel risk of general var. “We also believe it
tmlikely that the Bloc vill initiate new local aggressions with
identifiable Bloc. forces during the period of this estizate, since
the Conmunist lesders probably estimte that virtuslly any pev local
militery aggression vould now entail substantial Pisk of generel ver
© political consequences adverse to Blce interests.

n. Te is alvaye possible, of course, that the Kremlin will deen
some ect of locs] armed aggression sufficiently afvantageous to mke

rt paragraphs 9 - 1h is teken from HIE-95, “Probable
Soviet Bloc Courses of Action Through Mid-1955," & Septeuber 1953.

a

. 881091 229
Page-9
Cre

the risk vorth while. Moreover, despite its Teluctance to run sub-
stantial risks of general var, the Kremlin sight through mis-
celeulation adopt some course of action involving such a rink. We
elo believe that the Kremlin vould not be deterred by the risk of
Geverel var from taking counteraction against @ Western action vhich
it considered to present on imatnent threat to Bloc security.

2, During the period of this estimte the Communist leaders
WALL confuct @ vigorous political varfare esmaign to unteruine the
Western yover position. At present the Kretlin seams to be trying
to Give the impression that it has adopted © more ccosilistory policy
than thet folloved in Stalin's lster years. ‘The Kremlin may hope by
sush tactics to relax the vigilance of some Western states, to encourage
Gissensicn betveen the U5 ani its allies, ani to delay the progress of
Western rearmaent, We cannot predict bow long such comparatively
Conc liatory tactics vill contime; we believe that: harsh courses
Of ection similer to those pursued by the Kremlin in the pest vill
reappear vbenever the Kremlin decss them advantageous.

13. We believe thut Mloc leaders during the period of this esti-
mate will probably be prepared to reach an accommodation on some
minor questions, and way make plaus{ble but unacceptable proposals on

-8-

aaa

881091 Zo
Page-10
ear

major matters. However, they vill almost certainly be unwilling to
settle any East-West differences at the cost of major concessions,
We believe, moreover, that the Rlce leaders vill be extrensly
cautious in pursuing conciliatory tactics, and may revert from time
to time to demonstrations of toughness, especially vhen they consider
timt their vital interests are involved, or that their tactics are
being construed wbroad as a sign of weakness. Otters to negotiate
my be ecccepanied by reminiers thet the USSR now hes improved
capabilities in the nuclear veapons field, ani as these cepabilities
Further inerease, the Kremlin my become bolder in its dealings with
the West.

as. There are recent iniications that the Bloe intenis to
inerrase its trade vith non-Commnist states. The Bloc's volum of
trade with the Free World will protably increase sonevbat during the
Piriod of this estimte, but this trade vill ccatime to be very
aml in proportion to intra-Rice trade. Sev trade agreaments vill
Probably be intenied not only to cbtain desired imparts but also to
weeken the econcuie ties of non-Commmist ststes with the US, ani to
marr strategic trade controls a bone of contention between these states
and the US. While the Bloc will not be able to bring about # major
shift in present trade patterns, the Communists protebly estimte
that political dividends can be earned from even sul focreases in
their current volumes of trade vith intividuel Bon~Comunist states.

-9 -
Page-11
15. During the next tvo years the Free World will have difficulty

in mintaining its strength in the fuce of Soviet divisive tactics
and probable reduced apprebensions of East-West conflict. In contrast
to the Kremlin's ability to control or influence the close-knit
Soviet Bloc, the US, as leader of the anti-Soviet povers, faces the
complex problems of dealing with the loose anti-Soviet ccalition and
the agglomeration of other netions of varying neutrel tendencies viich
together make up the Free World. To many of this latter group,
Particularly the Hiddle and Far Eastern countries, the East-West

— struggle seems less important than the solution of their internal

. Problems and the assertion of their iniependance of the chief Western
Powers.

16. ‘Differing vievs alco exist between the US ani its allies
over the imuinence of the Camminist threat. —The very fact of-Communist———
aggression in Korea increesed fears of general war and ves « prime
factor in stimulating Western rearmment. How that many Free World
countries believe that the threat of var has been reduced by a Korean
armistice and by an ostensibly more concilistory Soviet policy, the 0S
Will have greater difficulty holding together an anti-Soviet coalition
and in securing increased Free World armed strength. The levelling off
of the US's ovn rearmuent effort and the decline in many of its foreign
. aid programs also lessens the sense of urgency abroad.

-19 -

a 88109172
Page-12
ee rrs—<“itr

 

17. The apparent declins of Free World confidence in US leader-

ship 1s another problem fecing the US. Influential groups in many
Free World countries, including several US allies, doubt the stability,
moderation, and maturity of US policy. On the one band, there is fear
the US will shift to @ "go-it-elone" policy or even retreat to
isolationism, on the other that the US will involve the Free World in
war. These doub!.s and fears offer a fertile field for Soviet

divisive tactics, and the new Soviet regime my be more successful
than Stalin in exploiting then.

18. In @ situation in vhich many Free World countries believe that
the threat of var has been reduced, economic problems will also assume
greater prominence and will test the strength ani cohesion of the Free
World. This reduced spprebension will weaken what bas been powerful
incentive to cooperation ani sacrifice. Moreover, some readjustment
toa reduced rate Of reermument and declining US aid vill be necessary.
Moch will depend on US economic policies and the US economic situation.
Bot unly would US economic setbacks bave a serious impact on the Free
World, but US trade policy will directly affect the economic health of
Free World countries, and US aid will remain in many cases an important
element in their military build-up, economic stability ani development,
and political orientation. The problem of East-West trade is also
likely to become more troublesome.

-n-

8810 91-777
Page-13
19. Therefore, ve believe that in the absence of reneved Soviet {
Provocation, there may develop further serious rifts betveen the
Pree World nations which will weaken the Western position in the cold

wer. Such rifts my develop in any case as a result of econauic
developments or local nationsiist pressures but reduced apprehensions

Of war, combined vith ekillful Soviet divisive efforts, would make
them even more serious. The most troublesces differences my arise
over policies to be pursusd in the Far Bast. It {s possible, there-
fore, thet the next few years might see en increasing isolation of the
US, not by its oun desire but because of increasing policy differences 7
detveen it ani other countries of the Free World.

20. [vee ssmuxing the coutimmtion of the Soviet courses of
action projected in Fart II above, there remins @ serious danger
Of new or widening East-West clashes in such critical areas es
Iotochina, Koree, ani Germny, Which vould again increase Free World
epprebenaions. Whether, if such clashes took place, the Free World
would then relly to the support of the US and of expanied rearmnent
Frogreas, as after the Korean aggression, vould probably depeni at
least in yart on the eiroumstences unter vhich the clashes develosed.

-12-

8810912

sep nn
Page-14
arr

Probable Developments within the NATO Coalition

21. Although we foresee no developments which will undermine the
basic solidarity of the MATO alliance, ve believe that, in view of re-
duced Europeen apprehensions of East-West conflict, rifte may develop
between the NATO partners, particularly between the European NATO
countries ani the US. ‘The USER vill attempt to undermine popular
support for the NATO alliance and for rearmuent, in yarticular the
Progrem to rearm West Germany. ‘These efforts, together vith increased
Soviet muclear cayabilities, continued Aintra-Ruropean differences, and
European disagreements vith the US over cold var policies, my lead to
more rationalist ant neutrulist attituies in Western Europe.

22. So long as apprebensions remain reduced there also will almost
certainly be @ further loss of momentum in the KATO build-up, The gen-
eral feeling that the immediate Soviet threat bas receded bes alresdy
led most HATO countries to reduce their military outlays. While a fur-
ther slow increase in NATO strength over the next tvo years fs probable,
only in event of reneved Soviet Sggressiveness vill #t be as rapid as in
1950-1953. Qn the other band this might allow many NATO countries to
concentrate on domestic needs and to devote more resources to mesting
their ovn social and economic problems. Such a trend might strengthen
countries such as the UK, which remain highly vulnerable to adverse
international economic developments.

-13 -

-CECREL.

881091
Page-15
a 83. Signiticant increases in European NATO atlitary strength over
the coming pariod will probably depend upon the extent to vhich Sain,
Be: Yugrslavia, ant above all West Germany can be directly of iniirectly
. Gescciated vith KATO. Toe Trieste issue vill remin an irritagt in
: Ttalo-Togoslay relations vateh vill renter the assostation of ‘Tugoslavia
With HATO difficult. Until a settlenent of the Trieste Lesue is generally
accepted, the usefulness to HATO of the Greok-Turktah-Yigosiav entente

 

a. But shove ali, the prospects for grater buropeun MO strength
and cohesion will revolve inerwasingly around the interlocking problems .
of Germany future eat the ettitaie of Pre, As @ result 6 4

 
  

  

ee
: Hoe Kremlis sity seek to avert or postpone those developments by remmved.
talk of Garman reunification, but 1¢ 4s uilihaly to offer any terme viteh
would Jeoyerdise its control over East Germany. Adenauer's position is —
eo strong end German dieiliusicoment with Soviet unification offers 1s
80 great thet any Soviet offers not involving abeniooment of Soviet cea
‘rol over Mast Germany would be unlikely to heve mich tepact on Garman

  

 

which would enbanee the riak of on Mast-est clash in tte ane. a
likely pressure point would be West Berlin.

 

- an

wr. 88109124
Page-16
~ 26, Though many in France are avere of the need for strong govern-
° ment, there is no evidence that this awareness vill lead to a stronger
French political systen. -

 

-15-

88109127
Page-17
aaa

Probable Trends in ths Far Rast

27. In the last two Years the most active theater in the Eest-
West struggle bas been in the Far East, There th: Western Povars have
kept the Communists from overrunning South Kozea 2n4 Infoshina vhile
attempting to build up anti-Communist strength througs TS support of
the non-Comminist countries in this area. We beltevs it wulikely that
the Communists vill undertake nev local aggression in the Far Bast vith
identifiable Bloc forces. The exphasis in Communist Chine over the
next tvo years vill Frobably be on building up {oustrial apd nilitery
strength. However, we believe that the Communists vould take counter- 7
action against Western actions vhich they felt preserted an imminent
threat to their security, even at the risk of videning hostilities in
the Far East.

28. It will be difficult to increase the streng:h, cobesion, end

. anti-Comunist orientation of ‘the non-Commmnist ctaxo3 of the Far East.

‘The cessation of hostilities in Korea, together eft Cor=intet efforts
to promote rifts among the anti-Communist povers, wilt aid te this
aitfieulty. During the next two years tbere is urlikely to 2 aay

Significant improvement in the Western position ir th.s ares; moreover,

 

there are possibilities of serious deterioration, Parcicularly in Indo-
china, Indonesia, and Xores.

gg1091 27
Page-18
—enceer

A Ko-van political conference, if it takes place,

 

is unlixety to result in any agreement which vould alter the status

qo: The ccamnuists ave unlikely to break the armistice by reneving
nostilities, but. trey almost certainly will not agree to Korean re-
unifiestiz: o3 teras which vould endanger their control of North

Xorsa. Ca ths citer bund, ££ President Rhee reamins convinced that

the 08 coul’ neither prevent an ROK areed attack against the Communist
nor disses~ints iteelt support cd such action, once unier-

taken, we lieve that he J2 at time seek to disrupt the arais-
tice by sust ar attack, If hostiltities sre Feneved, the Communists
will proba>ly teke, at a minimum, the ailitary measures they consider
necessary t¢ cmintain their position in Koree. Unless the ROK renevs
Bostilttios, we believe thet there will be a continued armed truce in
this eres, Vath beth the US and USSR engaged in reconstruction and in
strengthening their respective Korean rartners.

 

‘Ths Comrunints probably will not sttexpt invasion 90 long as the US
defends Tuitnn; ord unless the US decides to support Chiang's forces
atrectiy by fo tua will be unable to underteke more than minor herass-
ment cf thy saiulend.

- 17.

 

-. 8810915277
Page-19
ray e

 

eaerer—

31. Jolloching. We believe that there vill almost certainly be
important developments in the Indochina situation during the period
of this estimte. The steedy deterioration of France's vill to con-
‘inne the struggle bas been at least temporarily checked by Fregch
Fesumption of the initiative under the leniel-Havarre plan. We do
not believe, hovever, that the French will achieve @ complete mili-
tary victory. the Freoch cbjective is to reduce the drein of the
Tnlochion war co France, while mintatning « position for Frasés ta ;
the Fer Est. “The outcome. will depent on vbether, by a cambination
Of military victories and palitioal concessions, the French oan strengthen

 

the Associated states to the yotnt where these states i be abla

   
 

Communist pressure vith great

   

te mintatn thense

Sancta ht ln rv ae as to et
with the Communists. Too Taniel-tavarre plan my be ‘the last French
“effort in Totochioa, Soul At gail to achieve ite chiéctives ve

| believe tat, unless the US proves villing to contribute forces, the
‘ren will ta tm seek to negotiate directly with the Comuntate for
“the best posstble terms.

32. For their part, the Chinese Comurists will elaoet certainly
Page-20
oe pre

 

sina?

Western moves which in their opinion threatened the security of Comm-
nist Chine. At the same time, the Communists will protelly talk of
peace negotiations as part of their Propaganda careicm <4 might reise
the Indochina {ssue in high level political conferemes. tuey ere un-
likely, however, to agree to any political settlemn: whieh thay believe
would lessen their chances of eventually gaining couzrol of Inioshine.

ther Countries of Southoest Aetn. Probleae facing the other

Southeast Asian countries are those of ettaining politieal stability,
Coping vith local insurrections, and meeting their ove serious econuic
Problems. ‘The outlook in the Philippines, ant Sa the ehesnoe Of serious
Geterioration in the Intochina situation, in Bursa, Thetlani, amt
Malaya, is for sous improvement in stability, though these countries
will Dy no means Fesolve their cumerous internal probleas. tn
Indonesia, however, the leftist cbaracter of the presen: governsent
offers increased opportunities for Communist Peagtration.

3h. Jaren. Accumulating economic difficulties ext tha reluctance
or inability of the Japanese Goverment to adopt enersetic econcmte ant
Fearmament policies are prolonging Japanase depextence on the U3 and
delaying Japan's develoyment as Counterveight to Communist power in
the Far East. At the seme time there 1s groving art.;-American

-19-

8810913Y_
Page-21
mer”

sentiment in Japan. Unless Japan can find the necessary foreign
markets ani take the necessary internal economic measures, the
development of @ sound defense structure as well as @ sound economy
will be epiangered, the present doninance of the moderate conservatives
will de weakened, and the vhole pattern of US~Jepanese cooperation ‘
WiLL be threatened. We foresse no baste change in Japan's pro-Western
Orientation, but economic difficulties ani groving wationalisa vill
create incresced US-Jepanese frictions and postpone the developeent

of @ strong anti-Communist Japan.

 

35. In the unierdeveloped areas of Asia ant Afrios the Western
yosition bas dsterioreted since World War II. Lose) natiouslien hes
Proved force against the est ant the deep-seated revolutionary
forces at vork in these areas have created political instability.

“It is ddfficult to overcome the anti-Western sentiments of the newly
independent Asian ani African countries and couvince thes thet Comm-
nist policies threaten their infepentance. Roeyt in Iren, hovever,
the internal Communist threat is sumll ant is unlikely to grov greatly
in tho next to years.

- 2+

881091 32
Page-22
eae

36. The Middle Rast and North Africa. Conflicts between native
Dationalists and the "colonial" Ppovers will continue, dut ve believe
that in certain areas there are prospects for improvements the
West's position. The fall of Mossadegh in Iran bas at least
teaporarily increased the opportunities for strengthening Iran's
internal stability and settling the Anglo-Irantan of1 dispute.
Chances foe settlement Of the Anglo-Eeyptian bese controveray have
fayroved, api if ¢ settlonant 1s reached £ vill peobebly have @
favoruble effect on both the stability of the Egyptian regime ant on
ths Western position throughout the Arub World. mn the other bend,
a2 Anglo-Egyptian exttlement may set the yattern for sintler sents cess
from Ireq, The Arab-Israeli steel enti, ot «rape / ——
Of lerge-scele hostilities remsins unlikely The favorable : [
policy that the US bas sdoyted town the Arab States may contribute
to better relations vith then. Hovevar, there remain possibilities
of markedly adverse developments in this volatile ares. Although
‘the deposition of the Gulten of Morocco hes temporarily bolstered
‘French control, it is likely to drive the nationalists to mre
extreme positions since France seems unlikely to implement very
far-reaching reforms.

 

37. South Aste. Tniia and Pakistan vill probably reeain ypre-
cocupted vith thetr cu serfous econaate end social problems; they

Will also rawain concerned with their dispute over Kashatr. {
. a.
rer
8810914
Page-23
2 es

 

RGR

India is unlikely to sbanion its neutralist position in the cold
war, but Fukistan, motivated largely by its desire to faprove its
position vis-a-vis Indis, will continue its efforts to secure scue
Pact with the Western Fowers, in return for extensive US afd.

Some further teprovenent in the relations of this ares vith the West
may cocur over ths next two yoars, but they will remin ecutely
sensitive both to enti-colonial disputes in other areas and to any
indications thit the West is pursuing egeressive cold var policies,
particularly egrinst Communist Chins.

Encbeble Trends in latin America :

3. Tere will probably be «@ continued trend in Istin America
toward extremly nationalistic regives ‘based on demgogic appeals to
sectors of new political importance -- organized labor, while-collar
workers, and the lover middle class. This treni vill be met evident
_ in countries viere rapid social ani econcaeic change is taking place.
This change results frou forced industrislization ét the expense of
egriculture, vbich is gsnerelly accoupanied by severe inflation. Right
or left extrenism which poses potential threats to US security interests
will probably be strongest in Argentine, Bolivia, Chile, Guntemala,
end possibly Bresil. In these courtries there vill continu to be
substantisl Comminist and demagogic nationalist influences, which
WALL attenpt to channel the resentment of the disloosted groups aginst

881091 7
Page-24
the US. In Gustemala Commnist influence over the governunt, elready
strong, may increese. Communist penetration of British Quians bas
Poced a new problem in the Caribbean area.

39. Most Latin American countries will probably continue to
cooperate vith the US in the UN on baste East-West issues, although
‘they will tend ineressingly to pursue an independent course on issues
affecting underdeveloped countries. Iatin America will be increesingly
concernsd about US trade and especially tariff policies, Mogardless
Of the degree of latin American cooperation vith the US, there vill
Promabiy be an increasing tenancy to expant comercial ant possthly
diplomtic relations with the Soviet Bloc.

Boas