
Page-1
>

ra glnerand

“O ;
aah

COPY NO. >
STP Sy

 

THE STRATEGIC VALUE TO THE USSR
OF THE CONQUEST OF WESTERN EUROPE
AND THE NEAR EAST (TO CAIRO)
PRIOR TO 1950

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW.PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL. =

 

   
 

ORE 58-48

Published July 30, 1948-S\ \\ AKA SY 1D,

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-
mission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

ska

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Department of Defense

Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission
Page-3
ORE 58-48 TOP § ET

FOREWORD

This paper is supplementary to ORE 22-48, entitled “Possibility of Direct Soviet
Military Action During 1948”. The latter Paper concluded that both the available
evidence and the “logic of the situation” indicated that the USSR would not resort to
military action during 1948. At the same time it suggested the possibility that the
USSR might gain sufficient strategic advantages from the employment of its recognized
military capability of overrunning Western Europe and a large part of the Near East
to induce Soviet leaders to decide upon this course of action, Particularly if the
Kremlin should interpret some US move or series of moves as indicating an intention
to attack the USSR or its satellites. The purpose of the present paper is to determine,
on the basis of the maximum available factual data, whether or not the conquest
of these areas prior to 1950 would actually place the USSR in a strong strategic po-
sition. Four subcommittees have examined in detail the economic, scientific, military,
and political advantages and disadvantages that would accrue to the USSR if it
adopted this course of action. The present paper is a synthesis based on these detailed
subcommittee reports; the reports themselves will be published subsequently in the
form of an appendix to this paper.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

15 July 1948
Page-4
TO ECRET

THE STRATEGIC VALUE TO THE USSR OF THE CONQUEST
OF WESTERN EUROPE AND THE NEAR EAST (TO CAIRO)
PRIOR TO 1950 *

Report by a Joint Ad Hoc Committee
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM

1. To analyze and evaluate the advantages and disadvantages that would accrue
to the USSR if it should elect, prior to 1950, to overrun the European continent and
the Near East (to Cairo), with a view to determining whether or not the strategic
position thus acquired would be sufficiently strong per se to induce Soviet leaders to
adopt such a course of action.

ASSUMPTIONS AND FACTS BEARING ON THE PROBLEM

2. The USSR has the military capability of overrunning Europe (excluding the UK)
and the Near East to Cairo in a short period of time.

3. The Western Powers would undertake immediate counteraction, including maxi-
mum employment of US air power, using the atomic bomb at least against Soviet
targets.

4. A substantial part of the merchant and naval ships belonging to the countries
which were overrun would manage to avoid falling under Soviet control.

5. A large part of the Near Eastern oil facilities and installations would be seriously
damaged or destroyed prior to evacuation by present operators.

6. The Western Powers, through naval blockade, would effectively cut off commerce
between continental Europe on the one hand and the Western Hemisphere, Africa,
and Southeast Asia on the other.

7. In addition to the assumptions enumerated above, the basic problem of analyzing
the Soviet position following the occupation of the areas in question must be considered
under two broad alternative assumptions:

a. That the USSR obtains a negotiated peace shortly after the occupation of these
areas.

* This paper was prepared by a joint ad hoc committee representing CIA and the intelligence
organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. It has been
concurred in by the Directors of the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, ~
and Navy. The dissent of the Director of Intelligence, Department of the Air Force, is appended as
Enclosure B.
Page-5
TOP ‘RET

b. That, after the occupation of Western Europe and the Near East as far as Cairo,
the USSR is faced with a continuing global war with the US and its allies, involving
ultimate US invasion of Soviet controlled territory.

(The first assumption is necessary because Soviet leaders might elect to exercise
their current military capabilities in the belief that, after Soviet occupation of these
areas, the US public would not support the continuation of a war to liberate the
European continent, and because, under the assumption of a quick negotiated peace,
the Soviet position would differ greatly from what it would be if the USSR were forced
to sustain the weight of a continuing global war.)

8. The position of the UK following Soviet occupation of the European continent would
obviously have an important bearing upon the basic problem, particularly under the
assumption in 7b above. If the UK were either occupied by the USSR or completely
neutralized, US capabilities for counteraction, particularly through naval and air
operations, would be reduced. If, on the other hand, bases for US Naval and air
operations from the UK remain tenable, substantial continuing damage could be in-
flicted upon the Soviet war potential, and shipping along the European coast would
be largely interdicted.

9. An effort has been made in this paper to develop the maximum number of factual
data with reference to the basic problem. This has been possible to a considerable
degree with respect to the economic, scientific, and military factors. In the final
analysis, however, we are still to a large extent dependent upon “the logic of the
situation” and upon deductions from the pattern of Soviet behavior for our con-
clusions as to the possibility of direct Soviet military action.

DISCUSSION
(See Enclosure A)

CONCLUSIONS

10. If the USSR could obtain a negotiated peace shortly after the occupation of
Western Europe and the Middle East to Cairo, the potential economic, scientific, and
military advantages to the USSR would appear to be very substantial, but the USSR
would not begin to reap significant advantages for a period of from two to three years
after the completion of the occupation.

11. The occupation of Western Europe and the Middle East, however, would involve
the Soviet leaders in grave political risks.

12. We believe that, in spite of the prospect of substantial tangible economic, scientific,
and military gains, the Soviet leaders would consider these political risks so serious
a threat to their own positions of power and to their ultimate objective of a Com-
munist world that they would be unlikely to undertake this operation—even under the
assumption of a negotiated peace—unless they anticipated an attack or became in-
volved in military action through accident or miscalculation.
Page-6
TOP RET

13. An analysis of the economic and military position of the USSR under conditions
of continuing global war against the US and its Allies prior to 1950, indicates clearly
that the total realizable resources under Soviet control would be inadequate for the
defense of the conquered areas.

14. We conclude, therefore, that neither the recognized military capability of over-
running Western Europe and the Near East to Cairo, nor any strategic advantages to
be gained thereby are of themselves likely to induce Soviet leaders to undertake this
course of action prior to 1950.

15. It is emphasized that the foregoing conclusions are based on an effort to weigh
objectively the various considerations with respect to the stated problem and do not
reflect an over-all estimate of Soviet military intentions prior to 1950.
Page-7
TOP S$) ET

ENCLOSURE A
DISCUSSION

1. This discussion will undertake to analyze and evaluate, under the following head-
ings: (a) Economic, (b) Scientific, (c) Military, and (d) Political, the advantages and
disadvantages which would accrue to the USSR if it should exercise, prior to 1950, its
currently estimated military capability of overrunning Western Europe and the Near
East (to Cairo).

Assuming a Negotiated Peace

2. If the USSR could obtain a negotiated peace shortly after the occupation of the
areas in question the economic, scientific and military advantages per se would seem
So far to outweigh the disadvantages that Soviet leaders might be tempted to undertake
the venture. Without giving any weight to destruction during the period of the mili-
tary operation, or to the factors of non-collaboration and organizational difficulties,
the theoretical potential gains may be enumerated as follows: :

a. Economic. Occupation of this area would more than double the technically
skilled manpower—engineering, mechanical, managerial—available to the Soviet
Union. It would increase the non-agricultural labor force under direct Soviet control
from 31 millions to 84 millions. The addition of European facilities for the production
of precision and special Purpose machine tools, optical instruments, and chemicals
would relieve a serious current Soviet deficiency. The supply of coal under Soviet con-
trol would be more than doubled and steel capacity almost doubled. Shipbuilding
capacity would be increased five-fold. Although the oil of the Midde East could
probably not be raised and transported in significant quantities to the Soviet Union or
Europe within the next several years, it would in the meantime be denied to the UK
and the US and would eventually be available to the USSR and its newly acquired
areas. Within 10 years’ time the joint economic power of the USSR, its Satellites, and
the occupied areas would Probably equal that of the US.

b.. Scientific. The exploitation of the facilities and the Personnel of the pure and
applied scientific institutions in Western Europe could, within five to seven years, in-
crease the Soviet war potential by as much as 50 percent. Through the acquisition
of the engineering and manufacturing facilities of Western Europe, the rate of progress
of the Soviet atomic energy program could be doubled and the Probable date by
which the USSR will have exploded its first atomic bomb would be advanced from mid-
1953 to mid-1951 or mid-1952, depending upon whether the USSR overran Europe
in 1948 or 1949. The USSR would obtain the stockpile of uranium in France which
is estimated to equal 25-50 percent of the present Soviet stockpile. In such important
industries as precision equipment, liquid fuels, metallurgy of high speed and high tem-
perature ferrous and light metal alloys, fine chemicals and plastics, the acquisition of

5 TORASECRET
Page-8
roe gts

European scientific facilities and personnel would within three years accelerate Soviet
developments in these fields by between 15 and 30 percent. The electronics capacity
would be doubled or tripled; production capacity for guided missiles of the operational
German type would be increased by 25 to 100 percent, and aircraft research by 25
percent. Capabilities for the development and production of chemical and biological
warfare agents would be substantially increased.

c. Military. The USSR by this operation would have extended its Western boun-
daries to to the Atlantic Ocean, eliminated all potential military powers on the Euro-
pean continent and all possible beachheads from which the US could (without am-
phibious assault) begin counter-operations on this continent, The extension of her
territory on the south, to include all of the Near East as far as Cairo, would provide
increased protection for her vulnerable industrial areas in the Black and Caspian Sea
regions. Soviet submarines could operate from ports along the entire Atlantic coast.
Soviet air power could cover the entire Mediterranean Sea and Sxtend far over the
Atlantic. Soviet capabilities for defense against US strategic air attack would be
substantially increased. Under these circumstances and given a protracted period
for the exploitation of the industrial resources and shipbuilding facilities of this vast
area, the USSR would be in a position to build up a navy and a long-range air force
comparable to those of the US. After a period of ten years the Soviet economic po-
tential for war would equal that of the US and the manpower resources for its military
forces would be vastly superior to those of the US.

3. The estimated advantages as outlined in a, b and ¢ of 2 above could be realized,
however, only if the USSR had an extended period of peace in which to organize and
consolidate the area. Initially the USSR would be faced with serious problems and
difficulties. Substantial, although indeterminate, damage to industrial installations
would have been effected by US atomic (probably in the USSR only) and ordinary
bombing during the period of the military campaign. The channels of necessary
imports from the Western Hemisphere and the Far East would be reopened slowly.
The escaped shipping might be slow in returning to operation under its original flags.
The organization of the area both from a political and economic standpoint would place
a great strain on Soviet administrative personnel and upon security forces. Entirely
apart from bomb damage, over-all industrial production would probably decline during
the first year or so as a result of purges in management personnel, changes in methods,
sabotage, and reluctance of the technically trained population to collaborate fully
with the conquerors. An attempt to integrate quickly the Western European scientific
and engineering personnel and machinery into the Soviet scientific research program
might lead to confusion and dissipation of effort that would temporarily impede
scientific progress; in any event the USSR would not obtain any substantial Scientific
benefits for from six months to two years. However, it is believed that under con-
ditions of peace, Soviet police methods could successfully cope with these problems,
particularly in France and Italy where there would be large, well organized Com-
munist parties and where the tendency to jump on the Communist bandwagon would
Cene <
Page-9
vos fleece

be pronounced. After a period of several years, therefore, of uninterrupted concen-
tration on these problems, the USSR should begin to reap benefits of the magnitude
indicated in a, b, and c of 2 above.

4. There are certain basic political considerations, however, which might restrain
Soviet leaders from adopting this course of conquest even under the assumption that
they would subsequently have a long period of peace in which to realize these large
tangible benefits. Soviet leaders would very likely view with grave concern the sudden
mass exposure of military and administrative personnel to the ideology and the
bourgeois fleshpots of Western Europe. The increased security measures and the
thorough re-indoctrination program which Soviet leaders have carried out since the
war among the entire Soviet population, as well as among the returning soldiers, and
the measures taken to protect the occupation troops, bear eloquent testimony to the
apprehension with which Soviet leaders regard any deviation from pure Marxist
ideology and discipline. Soviet leaders might fear—and their fears might well be
justified—that if this vast area were suddenly overrun by military force, rather than
progressively converted to, or taken over by, communism from within, the democratic
bourgeois society might, after a period of years, contaminate and absorb the conqueror
with the result that the Communist regime would disintegrate. Soviet leaders might
also be restrained by the realization that resort to conquest on this scale would alienate
the Moslem world and the peoples of the Far East as well as those of the Western
Hemisphere; it would undermine the validity of their anti-imperialism propaganda
and probably eliminate the possibility of winning the world to communism through
subversion. In essence, Soviet leaders could not help but see in this operation serious
tisks to the maintenance of their position and power and a possible obstacle to the
attainment of their ultimate objective of a Communist world. If they took these risks
they would definitely be stepping out of character, as in the past they have always
acted with great caution.

5. It is obviously extremely difficult to estimate the relative weight which Soviet
leaders would attach to the advantages and disadvantages of a course of conquest as
outlined above. Admittedly, the potential tangible economic, scientific, and military
gains would appear to be substantial. Communist control would be extended to all of
Europe and to a large part of the Near East in one quick stroke; the possibility of
achieving a similar advance through subversion and the collapse of capitalism would
appear remote and uncertain. However, we are inclined to believe that, in spite of the
large tangible advantages, Soviet leaders would be unlikely to incur the risks
inherent in this operation unless they anticipated attack and believed offensive action
necessary for defensive purposes. They have already made substantial gains—parti-
ally undigested—since the war. They are basically realistic and concerned with the
preservation of their own positions of power. They would, therefore, probably give
predominate weight to the danger of the breakdown of the ideological discipline and
security upon which their present control of the USSR and its Satellities so largely de-
pends.

7 nor fener
Page-10
voy flees

6. If, after the occupation of Western Europe and the Near East to Cairo, the USSR
were faced with a continuing global war with the US and its allies, involving ultimate
US invasion of Soviet-controlled territory, the following basic factors would prevent
the USSR from obtaining the tangible advantages outlined under the assumption in
2 above.

Assuming a Continuing Global War

a. The maintenance of a naval and air blockade would effectively cut off the
European continent from overseas imports vital both to the full exploitation of the
economy under peacetime conditions and to the prosecution of a war effort.

b. Continuing damage to industrial installations, oil facilities, and transporta-
tion from US bombing.

c. Increased difficulties in organizing the economic and political administration
under war conditions.

d. Greatly increased difficulties in dealing with underground movements and
resistance to collaboration on the part of the technically trained part of the population.

7. Only a in 6 above can be measured in concrete terms. An analysis of the economic
position of the total Soviet-controlled area in the face of a naval and air blockade,
which would shut it off from the products of the Western Hemisphere, Africa, and the
Far East, indicates the following serious deficiencies:

a. The USSR would probably be unable to provide the minimum food require-
ments for this area. The area would have a deficit in grains of between 8.0 and 10.0
million metric tons a year. Similar over-all deficiencies would exist for fats, oils,
and other foods.

b. Many essential commodities, such as natural rubber, tin, cotton and wool
fibers, copper, lead and zinc, would not be available in adequate quantities to support
full-scale industrial activity in Western Europe. These commodity shortages, together
with the virtual absence of stockpiles of essential raw materials, the poor condition
and repair of industrial plants, and the general economic dislocation prevailing in
Europe, would result in a reduction in industrial production in Western Europe for
an indefinite period to not over 60 percent of that presently contemplated for 1948-49.

c. Petroleum supplies that could be made available from limited synthetic
preduction in Western Europe and exports of crude from the Soviet Union and its
present Satellites, probably would be barely adequate to meet essential Soviet require-
ments for direct military purposes, but would not be adequate for industrial uses.
This would restrict the full exploitation of industrial and transportation capabilities
of Western Europe.

d. The demands upon land transportation facilities would be greatly increased
by the military requirements of the extended Soviet lines of communication, increased -
raw material requirements from Soviet sources made necessary by the naval and

8 TOP RET
Page-11
roger

air blockade, and the partial disruption of coastal shipping. Land transportation
facilities for East-West movement between the Soviet Union and Western Europe
probably would be barely adequate for the movement of military supplies and of
limited quantities of cereal grains, petroleum, and industrial raw materials. In the
Middle East, transportation facilities would be adequate for occupation, but not for
defensive, purposes.

8. The analysis in 7 above indicates that the naval blockade alone would create
for the USSR sufficient economic deficiencies to raise serious doubts as to whether,
from the economic standpoint, the acquisition of Western Europe and the Near East
prior to 1950 would adequately equip the USSR for the continuation of a global war
with the US. This analysis, moreover, makes no allowance for continuing bomb
damage to industrial installations, oil facilities, and transportation, nor for losses of
production resulting from increased organizational difficulties, resistance of the popu-
lations to collaboration, and actual sabotage.

9. These latter factors cannot be evaluated in terms of a definite percentage loss
in production. It seems reasonable to assume, however, that the loss would be sub-
stantial. If this loss were superimposed upon the critical situations created by the
blockade, particularly in food, oil, and transportation, the conclusion appears ines-
capable that the over-all Soviet economic capabilities for conducting a global war
would be substantially less than adequate.

10. The military position of the USSR after the occupation of the whole of Europe
and the Near East to Cairo would, on the surface, appear to be exceptionally strong.
The USSR would have denied the enemy the bulk of readily accessible bases from which
to undertake large ground and amphibious attacks. It would have acquired new
forward air and naval bases from which to strike at the enemy and his advance bases.
By an early development of powerful sustained attacks against the UK and other
enemy areas beyond the limits of the Soviet advance, the USSR might hope to hold
the enemy on the defensive and seriously limit the development of his counter-
offensive forces and activities. With respect to an air attack on UK, the USSR would
initially have facilities to support an air force of 6,500 aircraft (which could be in-
creased to almost 10,000 in a matter of months). Guided missiles could be employed
against the UK on a scale equal to that of the German attack of 1944, provided an
adequate production program had been underway for a sufficient period. The Soviet
Submarine Fleet, from the forward bases of Western Europe, could seriously interfere
with the shipping to and from the UK and to the Mediterranean Sea. Under these
circumstances the USSR could seriously reduce the effectiveness of, or possibly neutral-
ize, the defenses of the UK. ‘

However, except for these further capabilities against the UK— in themselves
largely defensive—the USSR would have exhausted its capabilities for offensive action,
except for air operations, after it had overrun Western Europe and the Near East to
Cairo. It would be forced immediately upon the strategic defensive, primarily for
two reasons: (a) the conquest of these areas would not increase significantly its re-

9 sopfhecses
Page-12
TOP SECRET

sources immediately available for the conduct of further offensive operations; (b) the
USSR would have undertaken a global war before it possessed the appropriate weapons—
the atomic bomb, a long-range air force, and a deep sea Navy—with which to strike
effectively against the US. The USSR would therefore have realized its impressive
tactical capabilities at the expense of committing itself to war in a situation that
would probably very soon place it at a serious strategic disadvantage, as a result of
counter-attacks that would in due course greatly diminish its military capabilities and
result in the loss of a substantial amount of the territory which it had acquired. It
would then never be able to develop the capabilities for the prosecution of a true global
war that an extended period of peace might eventually have enabled it to develop.

The following specific weaknesses in the Soviet miiitary position under conditions
of continuing global war would make it impossible for the USSR successfully to defend
its conquests against the counter-attack of the US and its allies:

a. As indicated above in the analysis of Soviet economic problems, Soviet eco-
nomic capabilities for conducting a global war at this time, would be substantially
less than adequate. Although the USSR could readily meet the estimated require-
ments of between 7 and 9 million men for military duties, this would mean the with-
drawal of 3 to 4 million workers of more than average skill and productivity from
the Soviet economy, thereby further reducing the economic potential.

,

b. The destruction of even a part of its meager oil refining and transport fa-
cilities would seriously cripple both Soviet industrial and military capabilities for re-
sisting a counter-offensive.

c. The transportation system would be barely adequate to meet minimum indus-
trial and military requirements. As the US counter-offensive developed, the com-
petition between military and industrial requirements would increase and the mobility
and the endurance of Soviet units far from their home bases would steadily decrease.

d. The Soviet position in the Near East would be particularly weak and vulner-
able. Logistic difficulties would prevent the accumulation of adequate stockpiles for
successful defensive operations in that area, and even limited enemy attacks on trans-
portation facilities could seriously disrupt the very close balance between ordinary
occupation requirements and capabilities for moving supplies to the troops. Under
these circumstances, the USSR would not be assured of free use of the Mediterranean
over an extended period of time and could not defend successfully against an enemy
offensive from the Persian Gulf area.

e. Naval forces would be totally inadequate to defend the vast coastline under
the Soviet control.

f. Soviet military morale, politically unstable, would be a serious weakness under
condition of protracted occupation duties and would be an important target for Allied
propaganda efforts.

g. Although the USSR could probably deal successfully with resistance move-
ments and sabotage during the period of its advance and for some time thereafter,

10
Page-13
roy crx

these factors would be a source of great weakness when the enemy counter-offensive
got under way. Basically, the USSR would be faced with the difficult problem of
conducting its defensive Operations along the entire perimeter in the midst of hostile
Populations; it would not, as in the last war, be defending Russian territory against an
invader.

h. Although the acquisition of advance bases for Soviet defensive aircraft would
make possible early interception of Allied air attacks upon strategic targets in the
USSR, the use of these forward bases would entail a vast dispersion of the Soviet de-
fensive air effort and diminish the intensity of fighter defense closer to the vital
targets in the Soviet Union.

i. Present Soviet radar facilities are not sufficient to meet the additional defensive
requirements that would develop, and any reorganization of radar defensive systems
required by the conquest of Western Europe and the Near East would at least tempor-
arily tend to disrupt present systems.

j. The supply of Soviet antiaircraft equipment would be grossly inadequate for
the defense of strategic targets in the vast area now under Soviet control.

11 TOYPSECRET
Page-14
ng lcrn

ENCLOSURE B

DISSENT OF THE INTELLIGENCE ORGANIZATION

DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
1, The paper “The Strategic Value to the USSR of the Conquest of Western Europe
and the Near East (to Cairo) Prior to 1950” is not concurred in.

2. The following comments are submitted:

a. Although this paper purports to deal objectively only with the advantages and
disadvantages which would accrue to Russia if she were to overrun Europe and parts
of the Middle East, prior to 1950, it actually goes further und attempts to strike a
balance and to draw conclusions and so indicates “intent”. It therefore is in a po-
sition to influence decisions. For this reason, the comments to follow include alterna-
tive conclusions which this Directorate considers more sound as a basis for decisions.

b. It is admitted in the paper that the evidence of Soviet intent is so inadequate
as to leave no recourse but to logic. An attempt to forecast Soviet action on such
a basis is considered unwarranted.

ec. The balance struck in the paper under consideration is through the processes
of Western, not Soviet, logic.

d. The paper implies that the Soviet leaders would be induced not to adopt the
course of action of overrunning Western Europe solely because of an unfavorable
balance of certain factors vis-a-vis the West and at a given time. The total balance
of power is not considered, nor does the statement of the problem itself permit the
projection of immediate advantages and disadvantages of overrunning Europe, against
long range Soviet ambitions. It implies that Soviet leaders would adopt this specific
course of action if they should decide that the advantages to their strategic position
were greater as a consequence of overrunning Western Europe and the Near East than
the disadvantages, without proper qualification as to the time period in which the
advantages or disadvantages would accrue. This can not be accepted as a legitimate
statement of the problem because the time period is not consonant with accepted
Soviet long range expansionist plans. It is possible that adoption of the course of
action soon, might pay them dividends later.

e. The paper does not weigh or consider those forces which will bear on Soviet
total power vis-a-vis the West after military action has been initiated. The differences
between the communistic and democratic systems, under conditions of war, may re-
verse an unfavorable balance. For example, it is implied that being forced on a “stra-
tegic defensive” would in itself be a handicap to the Soviets in their national aims.
This is false in the light of the basic Soviet conception of war, and their possession of
the resources in time and in depth to turn a strategic defense to an ultimate advantage.

12 TOP SECRET
Page-15
rorfleresr

in arriving at a comparison of war making potentials, it is necessary to consider the
total national resources of the Soviets, which can be developed and exploited under
the communistic system, as against the total resources of Western states which can
be harnessed to war, but which must be developed and exploited under a totally dif-
ferent system. Using such criteria, the long-term advantages to the Soviets, from their
point of view, become formidable. The habit of military organization and command
requires no readjustment of the Soviet national psychology during the period of overt
military action comparable to the great national dislocations suffered by the western
democracies when they are converted to a full war-time basis. It is entirely possible
that the Soviets believe that their system would prove hardier under the conditions
of continued global war than that of the western democracies.

f. The paper attempts to strike a balance by examining and analyzing four sepa-
rate categories: economic, political, scientific, and military, each explored separately
in supporting papers, but synthesized for the final estimate. Such compartmental
consideration does not give full play to the dynamic inter-relationships and relative
values of these factors in determining the overall strategic position of the Soviet na-
tion at any given time. Nor can they be studied without reference to the dynamic
force that stems from Soviet ideology. For this reason, any assessment of advantages
or disadvantages contained alone in economic, scientific, military, and political cate-
gories, will reveal only part of the truth. It is in the synthesis of these elements, in-
fluenced by an over-riding, guiding principle, the basic ideology, that some apprecia-
tion can be reached which is bound to come nearer the whole truth.

The phenomenon of a new, virile society, thrusting itself conspicuously on the
world stage and demanding a share in world power commensurate with its enormous
mass and population is not new or unique, but the conditions under which this
phenomenon reappears requires closest study if it is to be effectively resisted. Simply
stated, the emergence of the Soviet nation is due to its will-to-power, supported by a
secret police, and motivated by an ideology that is challenging, which influences and
undermines all existing systems in a contest for world domination. The Soviet develop-
ment of their present capability was by design and implies a willingness to exercise it.

The salient historical fact of World War II is not only that the Soviet Union
emerged from that war at the greatest peak in power in the entire history of the
Russian people, and as one of the two greatest world powers, but also that it has ac-
complished this in face of vast destruction, and at a great cost in blood spilled. For
this reason, any consideration of such factors as the economic, scientific, political, and
military without link to the two great new forces, the unified land mass and the
ideology, is futile and dangerous.

g. The paper presents an unrealistic appraisal of the political risk since it is
hardly conceivable that the Soviets would take military action under circumstances
whereby they are clearly the aggressor. More probably they would promote a situa-
tion wherein they goaded the West into taking the offensive in which case Soviet
ideology would provide the rallying point for the “down trodden” world underlings
subjected to the Wall Street. imperialists. If they were successful in establishing these

13 TOPASECRET
Page-16
royfécrr

conditions, the Soviet leaders and World Communism would not weaken but greatly
strengthen their position.

hk. In any comparison of relative Soviet and Western potentials, it must be as-
sumed that the Soviets will eventually possess an atomic capability. Where the
balance will stand then is not estimated in this paper. It may not be necessary for the
Soviets quantitatively to equal our atomic capability, or even to possess a similar
weapon, in order to neutralize effectively our use of the weapon. For the Soviets to
recreate the balance of power in their favor it may be unnecessary for them to subject
their economy to the degree of strain that our atomic requirements impose on our
own. They may consider that with their vast expanse, their reserves of slave labor,
and their rigid, centralized control, in any final atomic contest our capitalistic economy
could not endure the same intensity of punishment we would be capable of visiting on
the Soviets, and which they may be better equipped to absorb. This factor may to
them render a decision in favor of military action prior to January 1950, far less peril-
ous than it seems. There are also grounds for Soviet belief that in a show-down, the
US policy might be to not use the atomic bomb.

It would also seem dangerous to dismiss any consideration of the possibility that
the Soviets have already decided that they will have the means of neutralizing our
use of atomic weapons should military action begin. Soviet capability of overrunning
the Western European nations in a rapid thrust that would envelop large segments
of populations friendly to the US, as well as many US nationals, including our occupa-
tion and diplomatic personnel, is generally admitted. The Soviets would have no more
bourgeois compunction about using these people as hostages against US use of the
atomic bomb than they would in sacrificing their own diplomatic personnel in the West,
ifnecessary. The hesitation, if not stoppage, that this maneuver would cause in Wash-
ington is a tribute to the humanitarian aspects of our system. The Soviets suffer no
such handicap. It is a potential equalizing instrument that they would not hesitate
touse. They may consider further that their bacteriological capabilities are an “equal-
izer” to our “equalizer”.

i. The Soviets have seen the economies of all the Western capitalist nations broken
by World War II. The United States economy alone remains intact. Their own
predictions have emphasized their belief in its collapse in a matter of time. So far,
US economy has resisted their predictions. However, it is in keeping with Soviet think-
ing to conclude that another World War may do the final job of wrecking our economy,
thereby ending the last major opposition to Soviet Communist expansion, and it may
well be to their advantage to get it started. Since the end of World War II, all the
usual means of Soviet war-making short of military action have been directed against
the US, but resistance has, if anything, stiffened.. New counter-forces are coming into
being, such as mass education in the hard realities of Communism and other types of
counter-propaganda. The Soviets may fear that their efforts to meet this challenge
may not succeed. Likewise, their efforts to promote continued economic and political
chaos in the Western capitalist states, as well as to absorb into the inner Soviet system
the newly dominated satellites, do not seem to be proceeding according to plan.- It

14 TOP flows
Page-17
TOPSZECRET

may be possible that these factors, together with an evaluation of the present and
impending success of the ERP would lead the Politburo to conclude that the law of
diminishing returns from their use of all means short of war has already set in.

4. It is possible that the Soviets have confidence in the ultimate survival of their
ideology, even though they may suffer a military defeat in World War III. It is almost
inconceivable to envisage a military decision in an atomic war that leaves intact much
of Western Civilization as we know it. To the Soviets, champions of a new world
system, avowedly to be built on the ashes of the old, this may not have so frightening an
aspect. Their system thrives on a brutalization of mankind, such as might be con-
sequent to the devastation of atomic warfare. Their ideology has been their most ex-
portable commodity, and their enthusiasm for building it up securely at home, at the
expense of millions of their own lives, and spreading it around the world, may dictate
bold action, regardless of certain practical risks, with confidence in their ability to
build out of the ensuing chaos the new. world Communist order under Soviet domina-

tion.

3. CONCLUSIONS:

a. Should the Soviets be “provoked” into a “defensive” military conflict with the
Western powers, the external political position of Communism might, in the long run,
be strengthened, not weakened.

b. Any action on the part of the USSR which would surely bring forth US atomic
counteraction would result in formidable destruction to a major portion of strategic
Soviet industry. From the Soviet point of view, however, this might not be a deter-
minant factor.

c. US counter blows would not necessarily result in a quick military decision;
Soviet capabilities against the US: bacteriological, subversive, and the use of ruthless
reprisals, would provide a partial counter balance to the atomic bomb, and a protracted
conflict with its greater strain on US capitalistic economy could work to the eventual
advantage of the Soviets.

d. The situation facing the Soviets: a revitalized rearmed Europe, increasing
Western reaction, a rearmed US and development of strong counter-revolutionary
forces everywhere, may be sufficient to outweigh all other considerations in a decision
to launch military action prior to January 1950.

e. We conclude, therefore, that the immediate disadvantages in the political,
economic, scientific and military fields, that would accrue to the Soviets should they
elect to adopt their capability of overrunning Western Europe and the Middle East
prior to 1 January 1950, are not sufficiently firm or weighty to justify any relaxation
of US preparations to prevent or to counter such action, and further that this con-
clusion should be made unmistakably clear to all US policy makers.

15 roy fener
Page-18
U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
2794—S—1948