
Page-1
SNIE 93-59
21 July 1959

OD
“J
eal

SPECIAL 4
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 93-59

THE FINANCIAL CRISIS IN BRAZIL

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

. The following intelligence organizations participated in the
if preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
. os and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of

State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.

Concurred in by the *. °- ae a s
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 21 July 1959. Concurring were the Director of Intelli-
gence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant Chief.
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assist- .
ant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department
of the Navy; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF;
the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff; the Assistant

- to the Secretary of Defense, Spectal Operations; and the
Director of the National Security Agency. The Atomic Energy
Commission Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the

subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

DOCUMENT NO. a! ooo

NO CHANGE IN

 

 
 

 

CECLASS,
APPROVED FOR RELEASE CLASS. CHANGED TO. TS S C
DATE: OCT 2000 NEXT
AUTH:

 

DATE: Seated REVIEWER: Std |
SECRET. Ne 326
Page-2
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
     
  
  
   

1, This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient indicated on the front cover and of per-
sons under his jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination
may be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments.

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army

¢c. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, for the Department of
the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

£. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

of Defense
i Director of NSA for the National Security Agency
j. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or

Agency
2, This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable
security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrangement with
the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should
be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2,
22 June 1953.

4. The title of this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WARNING

This material contains information affecting
the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the esplonage laws,
Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which In any manner -
to an unauthorized person is prohibited by law.

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense
Operations Coordinating Board
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

 

h, Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, for the Department - .
Page-3
THE FINANCIAL CRISIS IN BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the political and economic consequences of the Brazilian financial

crisis, over the next few months.

THE ESTIMATE

|. THE CURRENT SITUATION

1. Brazil is in a financial crisis. During the
next five months, in addition to normal cur-
rent payments for imports, Brazil is obligated
to pay $140 million in principal and interest
on its foreign debt, which totals over $2.2 bil-
lion. (Of this total, about three-fifths is ac-
cumulated commercial indebtedness.) As of
mid-July, Brazil’s current dollar exchange
availabilities were down to about $26 million;
its uncommitted gold reserve was about $70
million. Moreover, foreign exchange income
during the rest of 1959 will be low, since the
bulk of payments for coffee exports will not
be received until after the first of the year.
Finally, Brazil has stretched its credit close to
the limit. In these circumstances, unless
Brazil obtains US assistance or a moratorium
on its debt payments, it will be forced to de-
fault.

2. The present financial crisis in Brazil is a
repetition of similar crises in the postwar pe-
riod. A primary source of these difficulties
has been Brazil’s effort to sustain a high rate
of economic development in the face of de-

‘A portion of this reserve must be considered to
be potentially committed in that Brazil has
agreed to increase its contribution to the Inter-
national Monetary Fund and to provide its share
of the capital of the newly-created Inter-Ameri-
can Development Bank.

clining foreign earnings—Brazilian GNP in-
creased at an average annual rate of about
six percent in the period 1946 through 1954,
and at a rate of about four percent in 1955
through 1958. About 1955, however, the
price of coffee began to fall, and with it the
value of Brazilian exports. To maintain the
high rate of imports necessary for develop-
ment, Brazil has drawn down its foreign ex-
change reserves and has borrowed large
amounts on short and medium term arrange-
ments. Its financial position has been weak-
ened further by the failure of successive Bra-
zilian governments to control inflation.
Prices have nearly trebled since 1953. Major
causes of the inflation have been large-scale
deficit spending by the government* and a
continuing rapid expansion of private credit—
the Brazilian money supply almost tripled
from 1953 to the end of 1958. There is little
hope for improvement in this situation, at
least through 1960—Brazil’s balance of pay-
ments deficit will run at about $300 million
per annum in 1959 and 1960, a rate compa-
rable to that in 1958. The bill for servicing
foreign debts will continue to be a major
cause of this deficit; in 1960 it will be about
$350 million.

*The internal debt of the federal government is
roughly estimated to be 100-125 billion cruzeiros
(Le, roughly $700-860 million at the current
free rate of exchange).

SS 1
Page-4
3. In 1958, in a similar situation, Brazil asked
the US for balance of payments assistance.
The US granted this request, but only after
Brazil had agreed to adopt a stabilization pro-
gram acceptable to the International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF). The US has followed a
similar course of action with respect to other
Latin American countries, including Argen-
tina, Chile, Peru, and Bolivia. However, be-
cause of domestic political pressures, Presi-
dent Kubitschek was unwilling fully to im-
plement the stabilization program. In Janu-
ary of this year Brazil again indicated that it
required US assistance in financing a prospec-
tive 1959 balance of payments deficit of over
$300 million, and again Brazil was told first
to develop a stabilization program with the
IMF.

4. At the present time negotiations between
the IMF and Brazil have been broken off, pri-
marily because President Kubitschek is un-
willing to reduce subsidies on certain essen-
tial imports, especially petroleum, petroleum
products, and wheat. He argues that such
action would substantially increase the cost
of living, and that this would cause wide-
spread unrest and internal strife. He is al-
most certainly apprehensive of the effect
these developments might have on his party’s
prospects in the October 1960 elections.

5. The resolution of the disagreement be-
tween President Kubitschek and the IMF is
made extremely difficult because of a basic
difference in philosophy. He is committed to
rapid economic development, as well as to the
building of the new capital city, Brasilia. In
view of the shortage of domestic capital, most
of the leaders in his government believe such
development can be accomplished only by
large-scale deficit financing through the na-
tional budget and by an easy credit policy.

6. The Brazilian Government has now asked
for US assistance in the absence of an agree-
ment with the IMF. President Kubitschek
almost certainly is counting on the US relent-
ing somewhat and being willing either to put
enough pressure on the IMF to cause it to
modify its position or, in the end, coming to
Brazil’s assistance without an IMF agree-

ment. He probably believes that the US, ap-
prehensive regarding the security of US mili-
tary rights and US investments in Brazil
(about $1,000 million), will act as he desires,
lest a continuation of the impasse open
the floodgates of ultranationalism and anti-
Americanism. He appears to believe these
considerations will outweigh US reluctance to
make an exception to the IMF stabilization
program approach.

7. In the following paragraphs we estimate
the consequences of the Brazilian financial
crisis, over the next few months, if: (a) Brazil
refuses to meet IMF conditions and receives
no stabilization assistance from the US; (b)
Brazil refuses to meet the IMF requirements,
but the US agrees to reschedule debt repay-
ment; and (c) Brazil agrees to meet the IMF
requirements and receives additional assist-
ance from the US.

Il. CONSEQUENCES OVER THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS

Assumption A: Brazil refuses to meet the
IMF requirement and receives no stabilization
assistance from the US.

8. Economic Prospects. Even under these
circumstances, Brazil could probably avoid
default for the next few months. It has al-
ready obtained a $50-million credit from the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, using part
of its gold reserve as collateral, but on a dis-
appointingly short 60-day term. It can prob-
ably negotiate the rescheduling of some of its
commercial debts. Moreover, Brazil might be
able to maintain roughly the current level of
its two largest and most costly imports, pe-
troleum and wheat. Foreign petroleum com-
panies would probably be willing to extend
further credits in order to maintain their
share of the Brazilian market. Despite the
US position on the stabilization problem, Bra-
zil might obtain additional PL 480 wheat ship-
ments. Furthermore, while European coun-
tries (West Germany, France) have recently
indicated that they are unwilling to discuss
Brazil’s debt problem until Brazil has reached
an agreement with the IMF, it is probable
that some European credits will be obtained.

ae
Page-5
STE 3

9. However, these measures would only be
palliatives. Brazil would have to cut its im-
ports sharply, an action which would ad-
versely affect many important projects and
which would give a boost to already critical
inflationary pressures. Moreover, before the
end of the year Brazil would almost certainly
have to default on some of its foreign debts.

10. Political Prospects. In the short run,
Kubitschek could probably avoid much of the
onus for the deteriorating economic condi-
tions by blaming everything on the US. He
would charge that the US, under cover of the
IMF stabilization agreement, had sought to
interfere in Brazil’s internal affairs,-and he
would assert that he had acted to defend
Brazilian national sovereignty. The major
effect of the deteriorating economic situation
on the campaign for the 1960 elections, which
has already begun, would be to increase both
the shrillness of the anti-American speeches
and the number of politicians making them.
By the end of the year, the economic situation
would have so deteriorated that serious civil
disturbances would be likely. It is probable
that the military could and would sustain the
government in these circumstances, pending
the 1960 elections. However, if they came to
conclude that order could not be maintained
without a change of administration, the mili-
tary, as in 1955, might call upon the president
to resign and install a caretaker regime to
conduct the elections.

11. Brazil’s Attitude Toward the US. It is
possible that, if Kubitschek concluded that
the US would not relent on its conditions for
assistance, he would come to terms before the
situation had deteriorated too far. He would,
of course, seek to present any agreement as
a political success rather than as a capitula-
tion. It is more likely that he would main-
tain his position and institute a series of re-
taliatory actions, including perhaps the
blocking of remittances by US concerns and
the expropriation of some US holdings. He
might even come to abrogate US military
rights. Such actions are among those in-
cluded in a so-called “disaster plan” which
has apparently been formulated by certain of
Kubitschek’s more radical advisors. In the

assumed circumstances, they would probably
have wide popular support. But at the same
time there would probably be many elements
of the business community, the military, and
the government that would oppose jeopardiz-
ing seriously Brazil’s relations with the US.
We believe it unlikely that any Brazilian gov-
ernment could long sustain an anti-US policy
like that of Argentina under Peron.

12. Brazil’s Attitude Toward the Soviet Union.
Kubitschek would be under heavy pressure to
seek assistance from the Soviet Union. At
the same time, there would be opposition to
such action by conservative groups, especially
by the military. Nevertheless, if there were
no amelioration of economic conditions
within the year and if the Soviet Union vol-
unteered substantial assistance, it is probable
that Brazil would accept. While Brazil’s
leaders are fully aware of the importance of
their economic relations with the US, in the
assumed situation they would probably feel
that, even though the US would be displeased,
they had no choice but to accept Soviet aid.’
They would also believe that such action
would bring pressure on the US to reconsider
its position.

13. The Attitudes of Other Latin American
Countries. Latin American opinion makes
no distinction between the US and the IMF.
There would probably be widespread popular
sympathy for Brazil in its stand against
“dollar imperialism.” Initial comment in
those countries which have accepted IMF
stabilization requirements has been to the
effect that Kubitschek’s rejection of such
terms has proved that their governments need
not have surrendered to IMF dictation. On
the other hand, the governments which have
obtained US assistance by accepting IMF
stabilization requirements must, in self-justi-
fication, support the US position and, indeed,
insist that Brazil be made to comply with the
same requirements which they have met at
considerable political cost to themselves.

‘Soviet assistance could not do much to ease
Brazil's current crisis unless the Soviet Union
were willing to grant some balance of payments
credits or to supply a major portion of Brazil’s
petroleum requirements on a credit basis.

SST
Page-6
See 4

Popular understanding and acceptance of this
point of view would tend to increase if eco-
nomic conditions in the cooperating countries
actually improve while those in Brazil deteri-
orate. Nevertheless, nationalistic and anti-
US extremists throughout Latin America, es-
pecially those under Communist influence or
control, would continue to denounce the US
for intervention in the internal affairs of
Brazil through dollar diplomacy and to call
for united Latin American support for the
Brazilian position.

Assumption B: Brazil refuses to meet IMF
requirements, but the US agrees to reschedule
debt repayment.

14. Economic Prospects. Under these condi-
tions, Brazil could probably limp through the
next 18 months. It would probably avoid
debt default, but, unless Kubitschek took ac-
tions on his own further to reduce imports
and to expand exports, Brazil at the end of
1960 would almost certainly be faced with a
crisis similar to the present one. Internally,
inflationary pressure would almost certainly
continue and the price of bread and petro-
leum would increase—the very thing Kubits-
chek has sought to avoid in refusing to accept
IMF conditions.

15. Political Prospects. Kubitschek would be
able to squeeze some favorable publicity out
of what he would claim to be a successful de-
fense of Brazilian sovereignty. However, un-
less he takes major action toward establish-
ing a greater degree of internal economic
equilibrium, a course which is unlikely, he
and his party will become increasingly vul-
nerable to charges of economic mismanage-
ment. It is possible that this could become
a decisive factor in the 1960 elections.

16. Effect on Brazil’s Attitude Toward the US
and the Soviet Union; on the Attitude of
Other Latin American Countries, US-Bra-
zilian relations would probably not be signifi-
cantly affected in the short run; however, as
the economic difficulties continued there
would probably be an increase in Brazilian
irritation with the US because of its failure
to be more generous. While it is likely that

Brazil would at any time accept from the So-
viet Union assistance which Brazil considered
useful, under the assumed conditions Brazil
would almost certainly scrutinize possible
Soviet offers more closely than it would
under Assumption A. In most other coun-
tries of Latin America, there would be a tend-
ency to admire the success of the Brazilian ac-
tion against the US effort to impose distaste-
ful conditions. However, in the countries
now operating under IMF arrangements the
governments could probably defend their own
actions by pointing out how much more as-
sistance they obtained than did Kubitschek.

Assumption C: Brazil makes an agreement
with the IMF and receives assistance from
the US.

17. Economic Prospects. There would be
some improvement in Brazil’s economic out-
look. If the changes within the Brazilian
economy are for the most part gradually im-
posed, the reaction to any austerity measures
would probably be mitigated. Kubitschek
would probably not press vigorously measures
designed to curtail credit, to reduce deficit
financing, or to act substantially to raise
prices of basic items such as bread, petroleum
products, or transportation—all of which, be-
cause of subsidy arrangement, are major bur-
dens on the national budget. Generally
speaking, we believe it likely that under the
assumed conditions Brazil would maintain
through 1960 a rate of growth of GNP of
about four percent. Inflation would have
been curtailed somewhat, and exports might
show some improvement. But Brazil would
almost certainly still require external assist-
ance, including balance of payments support,
in 1961.

18. Political Prospects. Regardless of the
facts, the Brazilian Government would believe
it essential to present the IMF agreement as
a victory for Kubitschek. Provided no serious
economic crisis developed before the elections,
Kubitschek’s party would probably make a
net gain from an agreement with the Fund
and receipt of US aid. However, if economic
conditions should deteriorate, he would at-

GRieteeT
Page-7
SEE 5

tempt to place the full blame on “inadequate”
assistance from the IMF and the US.

19. Effect on Brazil’s Attitude Toward the US
and the Soviet Union. Brazil’s relations with
the US would continue to be basically friendly,
although the charge that conditions had been
imposed by the US would add fuel to the
anti-American campaign, which is already
strong and will increase during the election
period. While Brazil would be under less
pressure to accept Soviet offers of assistance,
it would probably still accept at any time
an offer which it considered favorable.

20. Effect on the Attitude of Other Latin
American Countries. If Brazil should reach
an agreement with the IMF, the result would
be to eliminate Brazil as a rallying point in
Latin America for agitation against US-IMF
stabilization programs. It would also tend
to reduce criticism in other Latin American
countries of their own stabilization programs.
However, should the other governments come
to believe Brazil had gotten a better deal than
they had, some would be likely to press for
an easing of the conditions of their own agree-
ments.
Page-8
