
Page-1
Director of —Fep-Secret.

Central
5} Intelligence

 

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED.
1999

The Winter of the
Soviet Military:
Cohesion or Collapse?

National Intelligence Estimate

This National Intelligence Estimate represents
the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
with the advice and assistance of the

US Intelligence Community.

—~Fep-Seeret-

NIE 11-30-91C
December 1991
Copy

ARG
Page-2
Warning Notice Intelligence Source

   
   
 

    

Unauthorized Disclosure
Subject to Criminal Sanctions

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

Dissemination Control NOFORN(NF) Not releasable to foreign nationals

Abbreviations NOCONTRACT (NC) Not releasable to contractors or contractor/eenSaltants
PROPIN (PR) Caution—pro formation ittved
ORCON (OC) Disseminati aa

controlled by o1 itor
=— REL... This joformation has been authorized for release to.

WN (WNINTEL— Intelligence sources or methods involved
‘A microfiche copy of tbirtfocu- Classified by 2164465
ment is available ffm OIR/ Declassify: OADR

  

DLB
f€S from CPAS/IMC
(703-482-5203 or secure
3-37108; or AIM request to
userid CPASIMC).

 

2-717); printed

Derived from multiple sources

 

 

Tic peneteConiidentiot:
Page-3
E> Director of —Fop-Geeret.

Central

% pg) Intelligence

co
ns

at
"

NIE 11-30-91C

The Winter of the
Soviet Military:
Cohesion or Collapse?

Information available as of 5 December 1991 was used
in the preparation of this National Intelligence Estimate.

The following intelligence organizations participated
in the preparation of this Estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency

The Defense intelligence Agency

The National Security Agency

The Bureau of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

it
"

also participating:

The Deputy Chief of Staff for intelligence,
Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Intelligence,
Department of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence,
Headquarters, Marine Corps

This Estimate was approved for publication by the
National Foreign Intelligence Board.

-Fep-Seeret-

SECCH22GH-
December 1991
Page-4
This Estimate is one of a series to be published in the coming weeks
on various crises facing the former ussR.-

The multiplicity of problems
facing the new governments and’ their limited ability to cope with

them make it likely that one or more of these problems will take on
“worst case” proportions. This Estimate focuses on the cohesion of
the Soviet military only over the winter and does not address all the
components that constitute current Soviet military capability.
Page-5
Key Judgments

The Winter of the
Soviet Military:
Cohesion or Collapse?

* Forces unleashed by the collapse of the Soviet system are breaking
up its premier artifact—the Soviet military; the high command
cannot halt this process. While a centralized command and control
system continues to operate, political and economic collapse is
beginning to fragment the military into elements loyal to the
republics or simply devoted to self-preservation. These forces
include:

— Fragmentation:
— Republic action to take control of units, equipment, and
facilities could provoke conflicts of loyalty within the armed

forces.

— Shortages of basic necessities are prompting commanders of
major formations to seek ties to local political bodies.

— Commanders who do not receive local support may act on
their own to seize or extort basic necessities.

— Shortages:

~ Housing shortfalls continue to undermine morale and
cohesion. .

~ Traditionally first in line for high-tech resources, the military
now has difficulty obtaining food and fuel.

~ Triple-digit inflation and the lack of a military budget
threaten pay.

tii TFep-Secrot.

SE04222 01
December 1991
Page-6
.

-Fep-Seeret-
Seesta2 OL

 

— Erosion of legitimacy and discipline:

~ Since the August coup, questioning of traditional discipline
has increased, and officers face difficult decisions about
whom to obey.

— The disappearance of an external threat has increased officer
disorientation.

~ Massive officer cuts further erode discipline and morale. The
uncertain future, coupled with a general lack of transferable
job skills, heightens officer concern.

The picture with respect to cohesion in the armed forces is mixed:

we have detected little change in the
day-to-day activity of much of the force, suggesting unit
integrity and nominal responsiveness to the chain of command.

— On the other hand, senior Soviet officers acknowledge serious
problems, and a growing body of anecdotal evidence indicates an
increasing tendency for unit commanders to challenge orders
that threaten the well-being of their troops.

The armed forces are likely over the winter to continue to exhibit
basic unit integrity and responsiveness, but, as the center fails to
provide essential goods and services, the established chain of
command will become increasingly irrelevant.

‘Moreover, merely getting through the winter will present a false
picture of military cohesion and stability. The most likely scenario
will be continued decay and breakup of the Soviet armed forces.
Halting this trend would require countering the centrifugal forces at
work in the former Soviet Union and a major improvement in the
economic conditions now affecting the-military.

Although less likely, there is still a significant chance of rapid
disintegration and widespread violence if a large number of units
seek autonomy or military organization collapses.

Even less likely is the involvement of the armed forces in a large-
_ScaJe civil war between or within major republics during the winter.
Page-7
Discussion

 

Afmfes are microcosms of their societies; often
indeed their core.

Michael Howard
The Lessons af History

. Everything I have devoted my whole life to building
is collapsing.
Suicide Note of Marshal Akhromeyev

Forces unleashed by the collapse of the Soviet system
are breaking up its premier artifact—the Soviet mili-
tary. While a centralized command and control sys-
tem continues to operate, political and economic
collapse threatens to fragment the military into ele-
ments loyal to the republics or simply devoted to self-
preservation. Widespread shortages are depriving mil-
itary personnel and their families of basic necessities,
damaging morale. The events surrounding the failed
coup and the collapse of the Communist Party chal-
lenge the moral basis of the officer corps, the author-
ity of the center, and the chain of command. The
disappearance of the perceived Western threat and
the disintegration of the Warsaw Pact have increased
the sense of disorientation among officers. These
forces threaten military cohesion, that is, the ability of
units at all levels to maintain organizational integrity
and respond to orders from an acknowledged chain of
command.

Stresses on the Military

Fragmentation

Plans by several republic and regional governments to
take control of units, facilities, and equipment on their
territory will increase pressure on military unity. So
far, these plans amount largely to declarations of
intent, but, should a republic decide to take control of
a major unit, installation, or nuclear weapons, a
showdown with the center could provoke conflicts of
loyalty within the armed forces. Defense Minister
Shaposhnikov and Interior Minister Barannikov, for

example, stated in November that force would be used
to counter republic attempts to turn such declarations
into reality.

We believe that through the winter more large mili-
tary formations will seek ties to local political entities.
Many units have longstanding ties to republics or
subrepublic areas from which they receive economic
essentials. A few Ground Forces units in Byelorussia,
Ukraine, and Russia already have offered allegiance
to the republics where they are stationed. Failing a
local accommodation, some unit commanders may try
to take direct control of supplies or, alternatively,
engage in warlord-like extortion.

‘The shift in political power to the republics has
allowed the nationalist genie to escape from the
Stalinist bottle, a condition that hastens fragmenta-
tion. Ukraine’s situation illustrates one especially
dramatic aspect of the pressure of nationalism. Its
declaration of independence and demand for its own
forces threaten to split the Soviet military. Ukrainians
constitute some 30 percent of the officer corps and

17 percent of the conscripts, according to Soviet
sources. Many of these personnel may join the Ukrai-
nian armed forces.

As a result of the accommodation by the central
Ministry of Defense (MOD) to republic demands for a
“stay at home” conscription policy, Ground Force
units in the republics are becoming more homoge-
neous (68 percent of Azerbaijan-based units are
Azeri). This process, combined with republic concern
about possible violence to obtain supplies, may lead to
“creeping absorption” of units by local governments.

Shortages of Basic Goods and Services

The Soviet military, traditionally first in line for high-
tech resources, now finds it difficult to obtain food
and fuel (see figure). It can no longer command the
Page-8
delivery of basic items across republic boundaries
amid widespread shortages and a growing barter
system. Industrial and agricultural enterprises in-
creasingly ignore orders to Supply the armed forces in
return for “wooden rubles.”

Units throughout the military confront worsening
shortages:

Housing shortfalls continue to undermine military
morale and cohesion:

+ Soviet media reported in November that troops in
the Baltic states—including an elite airborne unit—
refused to leave until “normal social and living
conditions are created at their new postings.”

Military pay is also threatened. Salary increases have
not kept pace with triple-digit inflation. Some units
have not been paid on time, a problem that will
become more widespread in the absence of a militar
budget. Yel’tsin recently promised that Russia will
pay the military (and double their pay), but in the
short run this probably will require printing more
money, thereby increasing inflation.

The capacity of the armed forces to deal with these
problems is limited. Military command and control,
logistics, and personnel systems are designed for

central control and have only limited ability to re-
spond to current developments. Despite such resources
as military farms and reserves of food, fuel, and other
commodities-{~

commanders look elsewhere for help. Units get sup-
plies from civilian enterprises in return for labor and
sell or rent military equipmen. The Chief of the
General Staff has asked the Soviet public to donate to
a newly created charity for the military. Clearly, such
makeshift efforts will not solve the problem. Only
improvement in the economy coupled with either
interrepublic agreement on military funding or com-
plete breakup into republic armed forces can do that.

Erosion of Legitimacy and Discipline
Soviet officers also face fundamental questions of
loyalty and discipline. They are uncertain how to act
in the present chaotic political situation. In theory, the
armed forces are under control of the central state
apparatus, but some officers question its legitimacy
and believe that no one is in charge.

J

Since the August coup attempt, questioning of tradi-
tional military discipline has spread within the officer
corps. The actions of senior officers—Defense Minis-
ter Yazov supported the coup while Air Force Chief
Shaposhnikov opposed it—exacerbated splits in the
officer corps and further weakened its cohesion,

 

4

Officers face increasingly difficult decisions about

whom to obey. Those who supported the “right side”
while disobeying their superiors—such as the Pacific
Fleet officers who supported Yel’tsin—are sometimes
praised. Others who followed orders are condemned.
Page-9
Fraditional obedience to orders is no longer adequate;
officers are not to obey a “clearly criminal” order.
But they have been given no clear guidance on what
constitutes such an order.

Massive officer reductions further erode discipline
and morale. Gorbachev’s announcement in December
1988 of a unilateral reduction of 500,000 men includ-
ed a cut of about 100,000 officers, and additional cuts
are scheduled. Most Soviet officers, to a much greater
degree than Western counterparts, lack transferable
skills; the uncertain future intensifies their fear.

Units Become Pressure Points

The effects of these pressures—fragmentation, short-
ages, and the erosion of legitimacy and discipline—
come together at the garrison, divisional, and regi-
mental levels. Individual commanders must deal
directly with these new problems. On the whole, they
have done a reasonably good job. Whatever their
internal problems, most Soviet units retain their basic
structure and equipment and, with varying degrees of
success, continue some routine operations and train-
ing. With no clear alternative, most Soviet officers
follow the well-worn patterns of the past.
Page-10
Prospects for the Winter

Over the winter it is likely that the armed forces

will maintain cohesion. We expect cohesion to hold
whether the armed forces continue to decay under the
nominal contréi of central authorities or whether
agreements among republics lead to division of the
armed forces among them. The latter case would
mean the end of the traditional Soviet military. Even
in a situation where its basic structures are main-
tained, however, the military will likely lose-control of
some units to republics and localities, or even collapse.
Such loss of control could lead to incidents of local-
ized violence.

Decay will continue. The pressures undermining the
military cannot be checked or alleviated over the next
several months. The situation—and the military’s
condition after the winter—will vary by service and
from republic to republic. Simultaneous and inter-
dependent outcomes are possible. The ultimate char-
acter of the outcome will depend on the military's
institutional coherence; its allegiance to civil authori-
ties; its ability to satisfy basic needs; and its willing-
ness to accept increasing hardship and uncertainty.

Our conclusion that the armed forces are likely to
maintain cohesion over the winter reflects the
following:

* Military service, for all its problems, will continue to
be more appealing to many than a return to civilian
life. The availability of resources in military supply
channels and reserve stockpiles, in contrast to bleak
civil prospects, will keep many units largely intact.

* Most officers support military subordination to civil
authority.

+ Yel’tsin has promised to fund the MOD, albeit with
major cuts.

Getting through the winter relatively peacefully, how-
ever, could present a false picture of military cohesion
and stability. Spring will find the military under

increased pressures and with fewer resources, Absent

interrepublic political and economic agreements,
there will be even less hope of a solution to the
problems facing the military. The reliability of mili-
tary forces ordered to take unpopular actions, such as
suppression of civil unrest, is open to serious question.
The effect of such orders probably would be to
accelerate the disintegration of the armed forces.

Tronically, one of the most disruptive, but least likely,
developments—a coup initiated by the military—
would require cohesion in the units involved to ensure
that orders would be obeyed. The unsettled atmo-
sphere in the officer corps, confusion about the legiti-
macy of traditional authority, and a reluctance to take
action that might accelerate military disintegration
inhibit such an act. -

“such a coup attempt
would reflect a desperate judgment by military lead-
ers that there was no other alternative. A failed coup
attempt could precipitate a descent into civil war.

Alternative Outcomes

Though unlikely, there is still a significant chance of
outcomes involving the severe degradation or destruc-
tion of organizational cohesion. These include wide-
spread local unit autonomy and total collapse of the
armed forces:

* Widespread local unit autonomy. Traditionally
strong ties between some units and local civilian,
authorities and the trend toward local and regional
autarky in the economy could produce even more
fragmentation in the military structure, leading to
autonomous action by units operating in their own
interest. The armed forces would retain unit cohe-
sion but fragment on a regional, rayon, or oblast
basis. The pressure on military officers to deal with
local civilian authorities on a basis of food for
Page-11
loyalty or to ensure more military influence in civil
affairs could become stronger. Unit accommoda-
tions with local authorities would bolster local ties
and lead to allegiance to republic or subrepublic
governments. On the darker side, where local
aUthorities refused cooperation, units could assume
local control or, alternatively, extort supplies from
local authorities.

 

Collapse. Conditions worse than we anticipate—
widespread failure to provide military personnel and
their families with basic goods and services, collapse
of discipline, and lawlessness throughout society—
would destroy existing military organization. Large
numbers of soldiers would desert. Gangs of deserters
would take what they wanted from the civilian
population.

Even less likely, though most violent, is the involve:
ment of the armed forces in large-scale civil war
within or betwven major republics during the winter.

Uheverse blank]

Triggering events could be resistance by the center or
Russia to republic efforts to assume control of mili-
tary forces or equipment on their territory or, alterna-
tively, violence involving Russian minorities in a non-
Russian republic. Such conflict would be especially
dangerous if the control of nuclear weapons were at
stake. Conflicts between republics other than Russia
and Ukraine may be more likely but, while violent,
probably would remain localized.

Least likely are conditions, much better than we
anticipate, that could halt the decay and breakup of
the Soviet armed forces. Such an outcome would
require major improvement in the economic condi-
tions now affecting the military and countering the
centrifugal forces at work in the former USSR.
Page-12
