
Page-1
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

THE VENEZUELAN ELECTIONS OF
14 DECEMBER 1947

ORE 65
5 January 1948

Copy No.2’7.

 

Boren ef
Page-2
ORE 65 CQMEAE ETA Tree

5 January 1948 Copy No—22.

THE VENEZUELAN ELECTIONS OF 14 DECEMBER 1947

SUMMARY

Democratica, which gave it the presidency and control of both houses of Congress,
not only assures a progressive and pro-US government but continues in power an
active non-Communist party which can be counted on to obstruct the development
of a strong Communist movement.

 

Note: This paper has the concurrence of the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Air Force and the Navy. The dissent of the Department of the Army ts set forth
in Enclosure “A”,
Page-3
THE VENEZUELAN ELECTIONS OF 14 DECEMBER 1947

The elections held in Veriezuela on 14 December 1947 reflect the character of
the revolution that occurred in that country in October 1945, and confirm the view
that the Venezuelan Government is today, for the first time, democratic both in
form and in operation.

During the two-year interval since the revolution, Venezuela has been governed
by a Junta headed by a political reformer named Rémulo Betancourt. On coming
to power, this Junta instituted a Program of economic and social reform without
precedent in Venezuela’s history. At the same time an intensified effort was made to
win wider popular support (a) as a defense against counter-revolutionary movements
through a period of “consolidation,” and (b) to prepare the way for democratic
elections under a new liberal constitutional system. The 14 December elections place
the stamp of unmistakable popular approval on the course the Junta has followed,
and leave the Accién Democratica in complete mastery of the Venezuelan political
Scene.

The democratic character of the present Venezuelan regime is indicated by (a)
the decisive popular vote of confidence it received in the 14 December elections, (b)
the social and economic policies to which the new Rémulo Gallegos government stands
commited as the successor of the Junta, (c) the character of the regime’s electoral
system, as revealed both by the new suffrage legislation and the peaceful and fair
manner in which the 14 December elections were conducted.

Three of Venezuela’s four major parties ran presidential candidates in the recent
election, and all four offered candidates for both houses of Congress. On the basis
of approximately nine-tenths of the total vote (the other tenth is still to be counted),
the electoral verdict stands as follows:

 

Presidential 1 Congressional
Accién Democratica 831,087 791,067
COPEI 261,753 200,777
Communist 35,716 43,148

1,128,556 1,034,992

Under the Venezuelan system of proportional representation it is expected that the
composition of the houses of Congress will be:

Senate House
Accién Democratica 38 85
COPEL 6 20
Communists 1 4
Unién Republicana Democratica 1 4

* Completed count of votes cast for presidential candidates is: Gallegos (Accién Democratica)
871,752; Caldera (COPEI) 262,204; and Machado (Communist) 36,514. Completed count for con-

2 NTIAL

 

gressional candidates is noi available.
Page-4
connyglrran

The new Accién Democratica president, Romulo Gallegos, will accordingly be able
to count on firm congressional support for his legislative program,

The social and economic progressivism of the revolutionary Junta (to a con-
tinuation of which the newly elected Government is firmly committed) has been
clearly demonstrated. Accién Democratica’s leaders, out of an avowed determination
to make AD a “popular” party, have deliberately sought, and won, support from all
segments of the population. AD is not, therefore, a strictly working-class party, but
rather a coalition of those groups that are seeking to promote the industrialization
of the country, extensive land reforms, better standards of living, health measures and
cultural opportunities for the people; and the establishment of a tradition of demo-
cratic processes. The Junta’s accomplishments in education, housing, in extension
of the trade-union movement, in improving working conditions in the country’s in-
dustrial concerns, in basing taxation on ability to pay, in agrarian reform, and in the
promotion of agricultural and pastoral production, attest to the progressive trend in
Venezuelan public policy.

Because of post-revolutionary changes in Venezuela’s electoral law and because
of the impartial manner in which the Junta conducted the electoral campaign and the
voting, the 14 December elections were Venezuela's first truly democratic national
elections. This is evidenced by (a) the unprecedently large number of persons who
cast their votes (Venezuela now has, to all intents and Purposes, universal adult
suffrage, and the final official count will almost certainly show that between one
million and one and a quarter million persons voted, out of a population officially
estimated at approximately 4,200,000) and (b) the poll involved, for the first time,
direct election of all important national officials. Before the revolution, the electoral
process had consisted of a series of indirect elections under which the voters elected
the city councils; the councils elected the state legislatures; the state legislatures elected
the Congressmen, and Congress selected the President, The December elections were,
moreover, held without violence and, accerding to foreign and domestic observers alike,
with exemplary honesty.

Accién Democratica’s policies, and its avowed political philosophy as well, look
to a rapid advance in Venezuela toward political, economic, and social equality;
and its enemies, especially among the elements that governed the country in the past,
miss no opportunity to identify it as a “radical” party and as a threat to the status
quo. Some go still further, and describe it as a disguised Communist party; but all
the evidence available points to the conclusion that (a) it is not only non-Communist
but anti-Communist, (b) it is so regarded by the Communists themselves, and (c) it
has gone out of its way to alienate any Communist support. Notwithstanding the
Accién Democratica’s anti-Communist attitude, the Communists will in all proba-
bility refrain from excessive or militant opposition since they are in agreement with
many of the AD policies and since they reason that any alternative to AD might
well be more anti-Communist and might seek to suppress the Communist Party or at
least to curtail its activities,

The Accién Democratica does not deserve the Communist label its enemies have
sought to fix on it. In fact, the great popular support won by the party in the

3 conyléscrn,
Page-5
CONF: TIAL

December elections is another indication that, in the special conditions of Latin Ameri-
can politics, an active non-Communist progressive party constitutes one of the best
guarantees against a strong Communist movement. In foreign policy the AD is pro-US
and anti-USSR.

4 CONFT TIAL
Page-6
Cc TAL

ENCLOSURE “A”

DISSENT OF THE INTELLIGENCE DIVISION
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

The Intelligence Division, Department of the Army, does not believe that Accién
Democratica is at present an active non-communist party “which can be counted on to
obstruct the development of a strong Communist movement.” It is believed that
Acci6n Democratica may cooperate with the Communists in the future if it seems
expedient, as it has done in the past. It is not believed that the present Junta is
democratic in operation nor that the 14 December elections place the stamp of “un-
mistakable popular approval” on the actions of Junta. It is the opinion of the Intelli-
gence Division that the Junta has done little actually in the way of social and economic
reform except on paper. It appears to the Intelligence Division that the nationai'sm
of Accién Democratica represents a potential danger to United States interests in Vene-
zuelan oil and that their present temperate pro-United States policy represents ex-
pediency.
Page-7
