
Page-1
NIE 60/70-2-61
31 August 1961

‘NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 60/70-2-61

 

LB LIBRARY
Mandatory R
Case # NLJ2
Document #.

THE PROBABLE INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF
THE INDEPENDENT AFRICAN STATES

  
 
 
 

 

cele cpm een ae et mime te
ran 1

i
i
i
|
:
|
i
Page-2
a anne enn OTTER ETE RI MT

 

}
Page-3
/ THE PROBABLE INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF THE
INDEPENDENT AFRICAN STATES °

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the present situation and likely trends in the interrelationships of :

the independent African states and the effect of outside influences on the regional

politics of the area. .

CONCLUSIONS

1, The newly independent African states
have not yet developed consistent pat-
terns of relationships among themselves.
The problems of political survival and of
the maintenance of law and order have
kept African leaders from concentrating
on their interrelationships. Pan-Afri-
canism, disagreements between “radicals”
and “conservative” leaders, and the ex-
‘ternal influences of the Communist Bloc,
the former Metropoles and the US add
conflicting and com) factors to
the situation. (Paras. 7-10, 12)

2. Pan-Africanism is a mystical concept,
glorifying racial kinship and the African
personality and culture. Its chief target
is “neo-colonialism,” its eventual goal is
African unity. No black African leader
can afford to reject these concepts and all
of them to some degree assert Pan-Afri-
canist ideals. But the more radical
leaders, such as Nkrumah and Touré,
have found the slogans of Pan-Africanism.

especially useful in their efforts to extend
their influence and build up their follow-
ings. (Paras. 14-17)

3. “Conservative” leaders, such as Balewa,
Houphouet-Boigny and Youlou, prefer
postponing the issue of political integra-
tion. In addition, they wish to gain the
material benefits which the maintenance
of close ties with the former Metropoles
havesofar assured them. (Paras. 19-29)

4. Neither the Ghana-Guinea-Mali Union.
nor the Conseil de V’Entente is likely to
develop into a real federation. Broader
groupings suck as the Casablanca powers
(mainly radical) and the Monrovia group
(mainly conservative) have yet to show
any basic cohesion. It is possible that
the African states may be able to create
Some functional organs for economic co-
_ Operation. It is also possible that some
efforts will be initiated to create broad

regional machinery to enable African

Bernina eset nae
Page-4
5. On the whole, African regional rela-
tionships are likely to remain fluid over
the next several years. During this pe-

riod, we’ believe opportunism is likely to-

prove more compelling to African leaders
than ideology, and that there will almost

from both sides. (Paras. 24-30)

DISCUSSION

by virtually all the area’s leaders and decreases
both their interest in and their ability to frl-
low a consistent policy on problems of inter-
African relations.

8. While Africa’s new states differ widely in
economic and political viability, they share

 

*See NIB 60/70-61, “Probable Developments in
Colonial Africa," dated 11 April 1961, SECRST.

a number of difficulties in common. The
withdrawal of Western political controls has
produced potentially unstable situations in
the emergent states, and the maintenance of
law and order is an overwhelming problem in
most of these countries. Although European
influence has modern African politi-
cal elites, it has not been sufficient in most
cases to overcome traditional tribal cleavages
and rivalries. Now that the new African elite
has come to power, its members find that these
divisions still exist and consequently that
their base of popular support is too subject to
paramere hers apiece Aesqaeclaonie

sions appreciably. There is very little sense of
national identity among most Africans in the

‘They are desperately in
need of civil servants capable of rising above
the nepotism and petty corruption which fam-
ily and clan loyalties impose upon the aver-
age African.

9. The indepexJent African states face numer-
ous obstacles in trying to achieve economic de-

      
 
      
  

 

|
i
Page-5
|
|

sence of large internal markets, lack of Afri-
can entrepreneurs and trained perso:'nel, and
balance of payments difficulties all impede
such development. In addition, more than
85 percent of: Africans still reside in rural
areas and an overwhelming proportion of
these remain rooted in a subsistence econ-

omy—even those Africans employed in the

modern money economy are able to save only
very small sums. As a result, African leaders
are confronted with limited tax bases and low
revenues at the same time that popular de-
mands for education, and social welfare bene-
fits are mounting. They also find private
foreign investment is slow to move in and that
tks nongovernmental sectors of their national
economies are too weak and ill-formed to pro-
vide the necessary thrust for economic growth.
10. The range of problems confronting Afri-
ca’s leaders varies greatly, however, and geo-
graphic location is a highly significant factor.
Thus, the leaders of coastal West Africa share
a number of advantages over their colleagues
in the more remote interior. European pene-
tration has been most intense in the coastal
areas, and has provided the greatest impetus
for socio-political change. Hence, when com-
pared with the interior Sudanic staies, the
coastal nations have come to independence

this respect of states such as Ghana, the Ivory
Coast, and Nigerin—as well as the strategic
access to the Atlantic Ocean which they can
afford or deny to the interior statc:2—also
accords the coastal states a major advantage
in their relations with Mali, Upper Volta,
Niger, and the Chad. Most moves for unifica-
tion have come from the coast rather than the
interior.

Ea Eee ine states themselves
the peoples of itcaty Ceanions than thoulae
vanced and politically conscious than those

 

 

areas. On the whoue, it tends to be a divisive
rather than a unifying force.

I. MAJOR FORCES SHAPING POLITICAL RE-
LATIONSHIPS "

42, The initial efforts by the leaders of Africa's
new states to define a relationship with one
another hare thrown into sharp relief some
of the primary forces which shape African
politics. | ‘These involve Pan-Africanism, “rad-

Efforts to unite the divided African peoples
and to advance the African colonial areas to-
wards independence were initially inspired
by Negro organizations in the US and West-
erm Eurnve at the beginning of the 20th
century. It was only at the 1945 Fifth Pan-
African Conference in Manchester, England,
that Africans began to play a prominent role.
Kwame Nkrumah, Nnainde Azikiwe of Nigeria,

interior. ieee

    

a

ii Rin waren omen

a ni
Page-6
prime movers among the Africans, with the
first subsequently appointed to the position

 

 

afm 4

nition of Pan-Africanist goals.
16. These goals frequently are couched in
rather terms—eg., to what

  
 

territories but retains effective controls

    

ing threat of fragmentation in the Congo are
explained away on this basis, as is the refusal
of conservative African leaders to devote
- themselves to Pan-Africanist
” goals. In order to combat the threat of fur-
ther Balkanization and ultimate recolonializa-
tion of Africa, the Pan-Africanists urge that
each nation diversify its sources of foreign aid,
adopt “positive neutratism,” eliminate West-
ern military bases on African. soil, and remove
who are alleged to be

      
    
        
   
   
 

the idea of a political union which he would
dominate. For the present at least, Touré

    
 
 

wadership supports
Pan-African goals primarily because it is try-
ing to outmaneuver a radical internal oppo-
sition. Tae UAR is less concerned with ideol-
ogy at home or Pan-Africanist doctrine abroad
than it is with the opportunities offered by
Pan-Africanism for enhancing the UAR’s own
Power, prestige, and security.
Page-7
“Conservatism”

19. African conservatism is an equally elusive
and tenuous term, and its adherents are even
more varied than the radicals. Some are con-
servatives in the old fashioned sense, but
many of them are in their own ways socialists

and reformers. Their essential difference ~

with the, radicals is one of temperament.
‘They are less doctrinaire and more pragmatic,
inclined to build on the past rather than break
violeritly with it.

20. While most conservatives cannot openly
for mutual agreement and
regional solidarity, they prefer to emphasize

upon economic and cultural cooperation, leav-
ing until later consideration the issue of politi-
cal integration. In addition, leaders of the
French-speaking conservative states—Hou-
phouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast, Youlou of
the Congo Republic (Brazzaville) and Tsira-
nana of the Malagasy prefer the
material benefits which close ties with the for-
mer Metropoles have so far assured to the ur:-
certain rewards of positive neutralism. The
leaders of Nigeria and Sierra Leone are equally
interested in maintaining some connections
with the UK although their economic ties are
Jooser. At the heart of the disagreements
which exist between the radicals and the con-
servatives,

“Personal Rivalries

21. The mixed backgrounds, sources of
strength, and divergent goals of Africa’s lead-
ers help to explain the tangled relationships
which exist among them. Varied in levels of
‘Western education, intelligence, and political

the bulk of Africa’s leaders are
still affected by tribal loyalties and animistic
Yeligious beliefs. Many are volatile and fam-
boyant; some are given to exaggerated politi-
cal postures and styles which are somewhat
confusing to Westerners. On the whole, they
are strong individualists and are present or
potential rivals, however ardent they may be
in thar professions of Pan-Africanism.

 

i
i
|
:

fl
i
te
i
li
g

t
f
3
E
i

§

ion Générale des
Noir—proved a powerful and influential fig-
ure. In the former British areas, Nkrumah of

|

traction which three or four African states-

External Influences

94, The ending of the colonial period has not
only ~emoved some of the restraints upon con-
flict and dissension among emerging African
states, but has also permitted new pressures
by external forces to build up within the con-
tinent. This is in part a natural concomitant
of the fissures and wrangling which are be-
coming apparent among Africans, since their

_disagreements are bound to attract Cold War

competition. Moreover, in spite of protesta-
tions to the contrary, Africa. leaders often
Page-8
invite outside involvement by ly
seeking the aid of non-African powers to sup-
port their own positions in the continent.

A. Western European Influence

25. The UK and France, despite their re-
linquishment of controls in much of Africa,
continue to maintain a significant presence
through their treaty rights, their economic
and financial interests, expatriate civil serv-
ants, and teachers. In most instances, the
new states also remain linked with the sterling
and franc zones, are heavily dependent upon.
the erstwhile Metropoles for continuing eco-
nomic and technical assistance and mar-
kets, and inok to Western Europe for arms and
other aid. Nevertheless, the West is burdened
by a number of liabilities in its relations with
the Africans. The memory of the harsher
aspects of Western colonial rule is too fresh to
be easily erased, and even where there were
few real grievances it is convenient to blame
the former occupying powers for any defi-
ciencies which may now exist. Moreover,
colonial and racial issues in North Africa, the
Portuguese areas, East aid Central Africa,
and the Republic of South Africa are likely to
be major impediments to cooperation during
the period of this estimate. Even conserva-
tive Africans are nagged by the fear that too
heavy a reliance upon the former Metropoles
could result in a revival of Western imperial-
ism ur, at a minimum, impotence in intema-
tional councils.

26. We believe that Western European cul-
tural and economic “afluence in Airica will re-
main at_a relatively high level over the next
several years, but that Africans increasingly
will attempt to limit their dependence by lonk-
ing elsewhere for aid and markets. The West
European nations, nevectheless, will be under
mounting pressure from conservative Africans
to extend arms and other

military support
against tions of the-more radical
ieaers |

LAGE)

Cc

13.
Ca)
; = W&6)

&. Communist Bloc Penetrotion

21. Communist Bloc influence in Africa has
Brown from negligible levels in 1958-1959 to
‘Substantial proportions today. The Bloc has
made serious inroads with dplomatic mis-
sions, arms aid, and economic assistance in
Guinea, Mali, and Ghana, and an

start has been made in Murogco and Ethiopia.
‘The Bloc has recently offered aid to Tunisia,
the Sudan, and the Soraali Republic, and is at-
tempting to rebuild its position in the Congo.
In addition, growing numbers of students,
technicians, and economic spzcialists are en-
rolled in Bloc schools. While these ties may
be regarded as part of Africa's period of post-
independence reorientation and adjustment,
we believe that the Soviet Union regards the
continent as particularly vulnerable and feels
that the Bloc has the potential to alienate
Africa trom the West.

28. The Communists probably will enjoy a
number of advantages’ in their competition
with the West. In addition to exploiting the
colonial and racial tensions and disturbances
in the southern quarter of the continent, the
Bloc: (a) retains greater ability to identify
itself with African socialists, who are deeply
committed to governmental direction of the
econemy; and (b) is willing to provide arms
and other aid to radical African leaders. Its
greatest advantage, however, wiil be :hr* it
shares with most African leaders the ebjective
of curtailing W<.tern influence in- Africa.
‘White we believe that th2 Bloc sees i’3 greatest
Opportunities in the radical leaders and move-
ments in Africa, it will establish economic and
Political relations with conservative states as
well. Over the next two or three years, the
Bloc will probably have considerable success in
increasing its influence with African states
ard in promoting neutralist foreign policies,
even in countries now aligned with the West.
Because the Communist movement in Africa
Page-9
'

|

 

   

ith
lal
f

=

        
   

10 years ago, now seek a majcr role amongz..
the expanding group of African nations.
of

   

and the Horn have involved black Africans in
such unwanted disputes as the Ethfopian-
Somali boundary question, Morocco’s terri-
torial claims in the Western Sahara, and, to
some extent, even she Algerian question.

. 32. While the many divisions among the

Selves. As a resuit, the latter often have split

“at conferences, with Morocco and the UAR

aligning themselves with the more radical
leaders, and Tunisia, Libya, Sudan, Ethiopia,
and Somalia joining the so-crlied conserva-
tives. Furthe: complicating efforts at unity
are the aspirations of the /AR's Nasser and
Morocco’s Hassan II for a preferential posi-
tion among Africa's leaders— emhitions which
are greatly resented by black Africa’s militant
nationalists and conservatives alike.
Page-10
seer 0 sesereemere perenne mererenneee tenner #

33. Over the next several years, Nasser in
ticular is likely to seek an even greater role
for himself in Africa through: (a) the Afro-
Asian Solidar..y Committce and related
organs; (b) subsidization of exiled colonial
African nationglist groups; and (c) diplomat-
ic and arms support for extremist par*ies in
states controlled by conservative pro-Western
leaders.. We believe, however, that Nasser’s
intervention in such a manner will irritate not
only conservative African leaders but even
radicals such as Nkrumah and Touré, who are
themselves anxious to become the rallying
points for political militants in black Africa.
However, it is likely that Nasser can continue
to work with the African radicals on specific
issues.

INTERVENTION AND SUBVERSION

34. The intervention of African leaders in the
affairs of neighboring areas is not a new
phenomenon induced by the Congo crisis.
‘The breakdown of authority and resultant
strife in the Congo have merely accentuated a
political process which has been endemic to
Ulack Afsica since World War I. Particularly
in French-speaking tropical Africa, politica!
parties often were ‘ransterritorial prior to in-

This pattern was accepted as
normal since, until the past several years,
indigenous leaders in former French West and
<Squatorial Africa were uncertain whether
their territories would come to indepen‘ence
as separate entities or as members of a broad
federation. Since independence, however, at-
tempts to export influence abroad in the form
of international such
as the erstwhile Mali Ferleration’s Parti de la
Fédération Afrizaine, which sought to estab-
Yeh branches in several adjoining African
states, foundered on the resistance of local
Jeaders who themselves were developing 2u-
thoritarian one-party regimes. Nevertheless,
Houphourt-Boigny continues to wield con-
siderable influence in Dahomey and Niger and
probably is capable of making and unseating
teaders in these two states.

35. The frailty and internal divisions of most
of the new African states makes intervention
in their affairs by ueighboring leaders thirst-

bors. ‘The game of intervention can be played

by conservatives as well as radical leaders, as
has been demonstrated by Youlou, who in-
volved himself in the neighboring Congo
crisis as well as in the nationalist uprising in
Angola and Cabinda. Nevertheless, we be-
lieve taat over the next several years the most

at meddling and sub-

36. The emergence of a new generation of
African youths over the next several years is
likely to enhance the opportunities available
to radical leaders to topple their con ervative
rivals, Largely university-educated or the
products of labor union training, these youtus
are attracted to Pan-African ideals, and are
impatient with the lack of-dynamic leadership
in their nations. However, while willing to
accept assistance from Africa’s radicals against
local conserva’ ive leaders, we believe that
most of this new generation will prove equally
cautious in surrendering power and prestige
once they gain control of their national gov-
ernments.

IV. SIGNIFICANT PATTERNS AND TRENDS

Federations and Alliances

37. Despite sporadic efforts on the vart of
African leaders to fashion federal links in
1959-1960, they have failed to find the neces-
sazy formula to reduce the petty jealousies and
hydra-headed rivalries which thus far have
thwarted all attempts at political union. For
example, efforts to form a Union of Centra!
African Republics out of the four former

Republic
over the refusal of the wealthiest partner,
Gaton, to make any substantial contribution
‘to the proposed federal treasury. Similarly,
the Mali Federation, which was planned as a
Page-11
grouping of Senegal, the Soudan (now Mali),
Upper Volta, and Niger, suffered the early de-
fection of the latter two states when Hou-
Phouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast gave them
financial inducements. The uneasy union be-
tween Senegal and Soudan broke up in August
1960 when the Soudanese leaders attempted
to secure greater control by turning the fed-
eral arrangement inte = unitary system, a
power grab which was strongly resisted by
Senegal’s Leopold Senghor.

38. While proposals are frequently made for
the formation of regional federations in North
Afric: (Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia) and in
British East Africa once the states in these
areas all acquire independence, the chances for
their early implementation are considerably
Jess than even. As was the case in the Union

= 13@@)(s)

already find that by refusing
to commit themselves to any one neighbor
they have a greater potential for: (a) playing
off neighbors competing for their loyalty; (b)
gaining material and financial advantages
from the resulting competition; and (c) re-
ducing the risk of political absorption. After
the collapse of the Mali Federation, for ex-
ample, the Soudan (which became the Re-

PE ae ENE tear cem een ersgpeene a

the Mali

public of Mali) found that it could establish
alternative (though inferior) access routes to
the se> via Guinea, the Ivory Coast, and even
Ghana, all of whose leaders have proved anx-

_jous to urge their financial and other favors

upon Mali in exchange for some expression of
loyalty. Yameogo of Upper Volta has taken
to heart and apparently is
now prepared to cut back his dependence upon
the Ivory Coast by developing complementary
economic and other ties with Ghana, Guinea,
and Mali The resultant impact of such
maneuvers upon African regional relations,
however, is to accentuate the already prevail-
ing impression of extreme fluidity and in-
stability, with alliances crumbling as new
issues.and opportunities for personal aggran-
dizement arise.

General Groupings and Coalitions

40. Thus far, only two very loose groupings
of states, sometimes called the Casablanca
powers and the Monrovia group, have emerged
from this welter of confusion. The Casa-
blanca

Guinea, M3:i, Moroc-

powers—Ghana,
co, and the UAR—claim that they have a com- -

mon interest in Pan-African political unifica-
tion and the need to eliminate colonialist in-
fluence. In pursuing these objectives, they
have shown a tendency to cooperate with the
Communist Bloc. The considerable number
of African states which fall into the so-called
Monrovia group,‘ form a loose coalition which
is primarily concerned with social and eco-
nomic By and large aligned

cooperation.
- With the West, the Monrovia group tends to be

more relaxed on such issues 2s Balkanization,
colonialist threats to the newly independent
States, and the maintenance of heavy reliance
upon the former Metropoles for economic aid.

41. Two coalitions are at the core of these
groupings—the Conseil de l’Entente for the
Monrovia conferees and the Ghane-Guinea-
Mali Union for the Casablanca powers. Con-

“The participants in the May 1961 Mowrovia Con-
ference included: Liberia;

 

a

Monrovia meeting has been only the
latest in a growing series of African conferences.
Page-12
sisting of the Ivory Coast, Niger,
and Upper Volta, the Entente is a consultative

a joint Parliament and the issuance of a com-
mon currency. In many respects, Nkrumah
clearly attributes more substance to the Un-
“ion as a nucleus for Pan-African unity than
do the leaders of either Guinea or Mali, who
continue to manifest considerable interest in

some of their former connections

resurrecting
_ With neighboring French-speaking nations.

43, Despite their failure to register any sig-
nificant advances in creating political unions
or federations, the African states are making
some gains in forming regional institutions for
Mutual cooperation. Twelve states from
former French tropical Africa already are in
process of ‘agreements for what is

negotiating
. to be called the Union of African States and

 

10
Page-13
SNOISIAIG 2ALLVUISININGY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

vordvy:

 

 

   
    

 

 

 

ry
rove 7 ae
; eet, Sma +
1
homed
° ‘ :
VEN oo" sve
eas nd Ye ses DSpace
° and
aSimn wane!
nvions wot ee |
‘avi ° 7 ssza7y ee
“
[ HOW ‘ af 7
ik 1
Se, rel \ vinvarenvet
wand oN ae ‘. ‘
1 Sh ‘
:
‘ bs ™
wt vaed ‘ lent
i 27 teks