
Page-1
“TLL y¥ MoM corr’, 243

sEcker

. SPECIAL
, NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

THE EFFECTS OF CERTAIN VOSSIBLE
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE MILITARY SECURITY
AND POLITICAL STABILITY OF LAOS AND
CAMBODIA THROUGH 1954

 

SNIE 63-2-54
Approved 1 Jung 1954
Published 9 June 1954

The Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in thy
estimate on I June 1954. The AEC and FBI abstained,
the subject being outside of their furtsdiction.

The following member organizations of the Inteligence
Advtsory Committee participated with the Central Intel-
Ugence Agency tn the preparation of this estimate: The
{intelligence organtations of the Departments of State,
the army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Stag.

CENTRAL {INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Approved for Relaasa
Date 16, JAN 12
Page-2
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, ‘This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the Jurisdiction of the re-
cipient’s office who require the information for the performance of their official duties.
Further dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the .
information, tor the performance of official duties may be authorized by the folowing:

@ Special Assistant to the Secretary for Intelligence, for the Department of
State

dD. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army

¢, Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

@ Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Afr Force

@, Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staft

f, Director of InteUigence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

bh Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CLA.

3. The overseas dissemination of tHis intelligence will be limited to a period of
one year or less, at the end of which time it will be destroyed, returned to the forward-
ing agency, or permission requested of that agency to retain it in accordance with
JAC-D-09/2, 24 June 1953.

WARNING
‘This material contains information affecting
the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws,
‘Title 16, USC, Seca. 793 and 704, the trans-
mission or revelation of which {n any manner
to an anauthorised person is probibited by law,
Page-3
secpir

THE EFFECTS OF CERTAIN POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS ON
THE MILITARY SECURITY AND POLITICAL STABILITY
OF LAOS AND CAMBODIA THROUGH 1954

THE PROBLEM

To examine the present military security and political stability of Laos ard Cam-
bodia and to estimate the effect which certain possible developments might have upon

their security and stability through 1954."

CONCLUSIONS

1, Viet Minh forces are operating in Laos
and Cambodia, but do not currently pre-
sent an imminent threat to the existence
of the native governments. However,
this is so only because the security of
Laos and Cambodia is supported by
French regular forces and extensive
French assistance to the native forces.

2. Communism has thus far made little
progress in either Laos or Cambodia.
Nevertheless, both countries are vulner-
able to Communist pressures because of
their military weakness and uncertain
political stability.

3. Substantial Communist military suc-
cesses in Vietnam would probably lead
to an early collapse or disintegration of
authority in Laos and Cambodia unless
outside assistance or security guarantees
assured their protection.

4. If a negotiated settlement placed the
Communists in a position which would
enable them eventually, but not imme-

"The various contingencies considered herein

were supplied tc the intelligence community a8 &
Dasls for this eatimate, 7

 

diately, to dominate Vietnam, the imme-
diate danger to Laos and Cambodia would
be less and the Laotian and Cambodian
Governments could probably maintain.
control for some time.

5. If, as a result of a negotiated agree-
ment with the Communists covering all
of Indochina, French and Viet Minh reg-
ular units were actually withdrawn from
Laos and Cambodia (leaving Viet Mink
irregular forces still operating in those
countries), native forces could probably
preserve for some time approximately the
present degree of security and stability
in Cambodia and a certain minimum se-
curity and stability in Laos, provided
French cadres and the present scale and
nature of French material aid remained
available to the native armies. However,
such an agreement with the Communists
would be extremely difficult, if not Im-
possible, to implement and police, and in
these circumstances the native armies
could probably not for long successfully
resist the Viet Minh without increased
outside support.

‘seopét . 1
Page-4
SPICE TITRE aE

sEgKET 2

6. If outside support took the form of a
security system involving multinational
guarantees jor the security of Laos and
Cambodia and could be implemented in
time, that would probably permit Laos
and Cambodia to maintain their security.
We believe that the requirements of such
a security system would be: (a) adequate
MDAP-type aid; (b) effective protective
forces appropriately located in the area;
and (c) assurance of assistance in the
event of internal subversion as well as
external attack. The success of the above
measures, in the ‘ong run, would also re-
quire the mainteaance and development

of a political and psychological atmos-
phere which would motivate the indige-
nous peoples against Communism.

9, If Laos and Cambodia were parti-
tioned, the will of the non-Communist
remnants to maintain their independence
would greatly decrease, and their ability
to do 80 would be weakened because of
the new establishment in those countries
of strong and legalized Communist posi-
tions. Under such circumstances proba-
ply nothing but military occupation of
those countries would assure their con-
tinued freedom from Communist control.

DISCUSSION

1. THE PRESENT SITUATION IN Laos
AND CAMBODIA

Militory Security

8. Viet Minh forces are operating in Laos and
Cambodia, but do not currently present an
{mminent threat to the existence of the native
governments. However, this is so only be-
cause the security of Laos ‘and Cambodia is
supported by French regular forces and ek-
tensive French assistance to the native forces.

9. Viet Minh regular troops in Laos are o%-
ganic 40 regular Vict Minh divisions and are
View-amese Invaders, not Laotians. Vict Minh
regional fovecs, scattered throughout Laos, are
predominantly Vietnamese, but include Lao-
tians a: ‘vel.
effectively conducted guecrilla-type operations
at company level and are considered equal in
effectiveness to companies of the Laotian Na-
tional Army. They could be easily organized
into larger units, with & consequent increase

ARMED FORCE BTRENQTHS IN LAOS
ABOF ATONE WS

 

COMMUNIST. *ON-COMMUNIST
a_— =o
Viet Minh A. French Expeditionary Corps (includ-
Ing integrated Laotian troops)
0, Regulars 18,000 (of whom at least 5,000 are
a " waown to be Lactias)
") Altachs4 MiUtia 2,090 (all Laotian)
0300, Tow 30,000"
10,300 Totals i
B, Laowian National Forces
National Army 14,500
0500 . Regionals
National Guards and Other
Semimilitary 8,500
‘Fotal 21,000
— —_
18,800 Grandg Totals Laos 41,000
= aie
SE oxt T
- eT al

These regional troops have ©

 

 

ene a I

Rapeen een nay
Page-5
sxoxtt 3

in thelr capabilities. There are no known
armed non-Communist dissident forces in
Laos.

10. The defenis of Laos has depended pri-
marily on French Expeditionary forces, For
‘military reasons, the French may at any time
reduce or Increase the present strength of reg-
ular units in that country. If such strength
is reduced substantially below 10,000, Laos
would be seriously exposed te Viet Minh at-
tack or subversion.

31. The Laotian National Army, numbering
14,500, is organized into six infantry bat-
talions, seven light infantry battalions, and
one parachute battalion. The combat effec-
tiveness of the Army as a whole is only fair.

It fs inadequately trained and lacks experi-
enced native officers and NCO’s. The Lao-
{jan National Guard is poorly trained and

equipped.

12. The Laotian military establishment de-
pends elmost entirely on outside support.
France (and, indirectly, the US) furnishes all
equipment and almost all the necessary funds.
‘The French train, advise, and tactically direct
the Laotian forces, All French Expeditionary
and Laotian National Army troops in the
country are under French operational com-
mand. Approximately 300 French ofticers
and NCO's serve In the Laotian National
Army, and French officers occupy most field
grade positions.

ARMED FORCE STRENGTHS IN CAMBODIA
AS OF 1 JUNE 1954

COMMUNIST.
Qa .
Viet ink
9206 | Regulars
Attached Milita
Totals
228 mek :
Royal Army
7500 Regional and Miltia
National Guard
Serimiltary
Tota}
* 6,700 Grand Totals Cambodia
— —

13. Two Viet Minh regular battalions, organic
to a Viet Minh division, are now in northeast
Cambodia, These troops are Vietnamese in-
vaders who entered Cambodia in March 1954.
In addition, small units of Viet Minh regulars,
regional troops, and millitic are scattered
throughout Cambodia. The cor.bat effective-
ness of these regional and ima forces is
generally only falr, Dut thoes east of the
Mekong River will provably by raised to a

SEC

NON-COMMUNIST.

A. French Expeditionary Corps (includ-
ing integrated Cambodian troops)

8,000 (3,000 infantry;
2,000 service. Virtually
all Cambodians)

1,000 (AU Cambodians)
6,000
=

B, Cambodian Royal Forces
14,000

4,000
15,000
33,000
39,000
—

higher standard of organization and training
before the end of 1954.

14. There are also in Cambodia several hun-
dred armed non-Communist dissidents, who
are followers of the nationalist leader, Son
Ngoc Thanh.

18, The Cambodian Royal Army, numbering
14,000, is organized into ten regular infantry,
one parachute, and three light infantry bat
talions, Cambodian armed forces are heavily

tT
Page-6
secret 4

dependent on the French for finance, equip
ment, training, and advice, though less so
than is the case in Laos. However, the Cam-
podian Government exercises much greater
command responsibilities than does the Lao
tlan Government. French officers and NCO's,
who formerly served in the Royal Army, are
at present in the process of being withdrawn.
The Cambodian King has full administrative
control over all Royal forces, and operational
command west of the Mekong River.

16. The Cambodian Royal Army Is reasonably
well equipped and trained, but has @ number
of deficiencies, chlef among which are & lack
of adequate numbers of trained officers and
NCO's, a low standard of discipline and re
sponsibility in the officer corps, and an almost
paralytic defensive-mindedness, In time, the
effectiveness of the Royal Army may be in-
creased as a result of the efforts of General-
Nhiek Tioulong, recently appointed by the
King as Defense Minister, Chief of Staff, and
Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces.

Political Stability

17. The political situation in both Laos and
Cambodia is uncertain, but at present is rela-
tively quiet. In Cambodia, the royal Institu-
{Jon fs held In high regard by the people, wha,
have traditionally accepted monarchial au-
thority, and the King is personally poputar.
Moreover, Cambodia enjoys @ high degree of
cultural, ethnic, and religious homogeneity.
In Laos, the population is largely apolitical.
In neither country is there any appreciable
economic or social unrest. In both countries,
a tradition of a governing elite subordinate to
the throne attracts most educated Laotians
and Cambodians to government service.

18. Communism has thus far made little
progress in either Laos or Cambodia. The
Viet Minh is urpopular in both countries be-
cause its members are Vietnamese, who are
heartily disliked by both the Laotians and
the Cambodians. Communist-sponsored “free
governments” and “independence forces” in
Laos and Cambodia are viewed as parts of the
Viet Minh and thus have evoked little support
in {ose countries. Communist political in-
fuence {s telieved to be minimal outside those

areas firmly occupied by Viet Minh forces.
The “nationalist” appeal of the Communists,
which has been relatively successful in Viet-
nam, has been blunted in Leos by the general
political inertness of the country, and in Cam-
bodia by the vigorous nationalist efforts of the
King.

19. 'The Cambodian Government derives con-
siderable domestic support from the fact that
it ls anti-French, The Laotian Government,
‘on the other hand, is outwardly pro-French,
but this policy does not adversely affect the
government's domestic strength.

20, However, both Laos and Cambodia are vul-
nerable to Communist pressures, chiefly be-
cause of their military weakness, Moreover,
in times of crisis their political leadership is
often unpredictable, especially {n Cambodia.
‘There has been a widespread tendency In both
countries to regard the war against the Viet
Minh as being "someone else's business.” In
addition, the Communists may be able at any
time to take advantage of the fact that in
Laos, and especially in Cambodia, there are
rival cliques presently contending for political
power.

21. A source of weakness in Cambodia is the
existence of non-Communist dissidence. The
principal dissident ts Son Ngoc Thanh, who is
believed to be essentially an independent na-
tionalist, A premier of Cambodia under the
Japanese during World War MU, Thanh ts be-
lieved to have @ latent political following
throughout the country, particularly among
students, intellectual groups, and younger
army officers who see in him the embodiment
of Cambodian independence aspirations.
‘Thanh’s political influence has been sapped in
recent months by the nationalist efforts of
the King, but is still far greater than the
small size of his present armed following

. would suggest. Cambodia's political stability

would be greatly enhanced if he should rally
to the government, but his future behavior
cannot be predicted and it is conceivable that
he might Join forces with the Viet Minh. In
addition to Thanh, there are a number of for-,
mer dissident leaders who have rallied to the
King, but who continue to enjoy warlord-like
“autonomous” powers in certain regions of

sEcpet
Page-7
Cambodia. These people are essentially op-
portunists, whose future loyalty cannot be as-
sured.

22, There are no significant non-Communist
dissident groups in Laos. However, Prince
+ Petsarath, now resident in Thailand, is ® pre-
tender to the Laotian throne and has at times
been reported to be planning @ coup d'etat.

Il, THE EFFECT OF CERTAIN POSSIBLE
DEVELOPMENTS ON THE SECURITY
AND STABILITY OF LAOS AND
CAMBODIA ”*

23. The future security and stabUlity of Laos
and Cambodia will almost certainly be deter-
mined by outside developments. The fate of
these kingdoms will be largely fixed, not by
their own efforts, but by @ number of inter-
acting factcrs, chief among which are proba-
ply: (a) the trend of developments in Viet-
nam; (b) the scale and nature of outside
assistance given the governments of Laos and
Cambodia; and (c) the nature and strength
of Viet Minh military and political pressures
against those countries.

24, Revelopments in Vietnam will have an im-
mediate effect on Laos and Cambodia. A

strong non-Communist position in Vietnam ,
_ would tend to assure military security and

political stability. However, if key areas of
Vietnam fell to the Communists, pressure on
Laos and Cambodia would be greatly in-
creased. The military capabilities of these
countries are so slight that they would almost
certainly request outside aid to defend them-
selves. If such ald were not immediately sup-
plied, Laos would be quickly overrun, oF its
government would seek accommodation with
the Communists. Cambodia might hold out
longer, but in the end it too would be forced
to surrender or accommodate. If a negoti-
ated settlement placed the Communists in &
position which would enable them eventually,
but not immediately, to dominate Vietnam,
the immediate danger to Laos and Cambodia

—
©The various contingencies considered herein were
supplied to the intelligence community as & basis
for this estimate. .

 

sayhe t tet 8

would be less and the Laotian and Cambodian
Governments could probably maintain control
for some time.

25. If, as @ result of @ negotiated agreement
with the Communists covering #ll of indo
china, Frerch and Viet Minh regular units
were actually withdrawn from Laos and Cam-
pbodia (leaving Viet Minh irregular forces still
operating in those countries), native forces
could probably preserve for some time approxi-
mately the present degree of security and sta-
pility in Cambodia and a certain minimum
security and stability In Laos, provided French
cadres and the present scale and nature of
French material aid remained available to the
native armies. However, such an agreement
with the Communists would be extremely dif-
ficult, if not impossible, to implement and
police, and in these circumstances the native
armies could probably not for Tong success:
fully resist the Viet Minh without increased
outside support.

26. Under the adverse alternatives discussed
in the two preceding paragraphs, outside sup-
port on a scale larger than the French could
provide would be required to assure & satis-
factory level of security and stability in those
countries. If such additional support were
not quickly forthcoming, the resistance of
Laos and Cambodia to Communism would
collapse.

27. Uf outside support took the form of &
security system involving multinational guar-
antees for the security of Laos and Cambodia
and could be implemented in time, that would
probably permit Laos and Cambodia to main-
tain their security, despite rising pressures
from the Communists in Vietnam and a prob-
able growing degree of internal Communist
‘unrest in both countries. ‘We believe that the
requirements of such & security system would
be; (a) adequate ‘MDAP-type aid; (b) effective
protective forces appropriately located in the
area; and (c) assurance of assistance in the
event of internal subversion as well as external
attack, The success of the above measures,
in the long run, would also require the main-
tenance and development of @ political and
psychological atmosphere which would moti-
vate the indigenous peoples against Commu-

m.

SECRET
Page-8
sropts 6

28. If Laos and Cambodia were partitioned,
the will of the non-Communist remnants te

!

in those countries of strong and legalized
Communist positions. Under such circum:
stances probably nothing but military occu-
pation of those ‘countries would assure their
continued freedom from Communist control.
Page-9

Page-10
nn

THAILANG