
Page-1
NW. - COPY NO. 1
FOR THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UMITED STATES

 
 
   
 

“THE EMERGENCY CAPABILITIES OF THE
GERMAN RAILWAY SYSTEMS

   

REVS
Published-2 August 1949

beens cemeerarey er me 8 tee neat rns

TAVOELT NVAGUL *S ZHUVH

2
3
a
2
3
5
5
Fa
2
3
3
8
=
a

CENTRAL. INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.

Cestented by - 289325. ' a
too oe 9 FE Sree
Page-2
FBV NVROEG, °S RAV

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient...
designated on the front cover.and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for-the performance of their official duties. . Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa--
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State ~~~ =

Dd. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

¢, Chief, Nava) Intelligence, for the Departm! he Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

e. Director of Security. and-Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com-—— =~”
mission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for. the Joint Staff oc oe

g. Assistant, Director for Collection and Dissemination, cla, for any other
Department or Agency ao,

 

2. This copy may.be either-retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with _..___
applicable security regulations, or-returned to the Central Intelligence-Agency by = a
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. .

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

Natiunal Security Council

National Security Resources Board ———
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense

Department of the Army

Department of the Navy

Department of the Air Force

State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committce -- -—-——— -—
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Atomic Energy Commission

Research and Development Board

SRORET

a eae

 

 

cape
Page-3
seth

JHE EMERGENCY CAPABILITIES OF THE GERMAN RAILWAY. SYSTEMS”

SUMMARY

>
e

The capabilities of the German railways
have been drastically reduced as a result of
war damage, loss of equipment, and general

deterioration. With the_systems operating —— capabilities of the German railways _is_their..

nearly at capacity in 1948,German railway.
traffic amounted to only 63 percent of the 1937
tonnage, though it represented approximately
67 percent of the 1937 ton-kilometer_total.
Even at this curtailed level of operations, how-
ever, the railways of Germany have a capacity
which would considerably_exceed the mini-
mum requirements of the civilian population
in an emergency.

The latent excess capacity of the German
railroads would be adequate to sustain rela=
tively large-scale military movements. The
present German rail system-has a capacity -
about 20 percent greater than that. which
would be required to move a-volume of traftic.

 

equal to that of the depression year 1932, in

which the modern German economy probably

reached its lowest prewar level. This surplus ~

in excess of 1932 traffic amounts to at least 8
billion ton-kilometers annually,-or roughly
130,000 metric tons daily.on the basis of the.
1948 average haul. As almost all of the sur-
plus capacity would be available in Western
Germany, western systems would be capable
of supporting a far greater increase of military ~
traffic at any reduced civilian standard of liv-

 

 

   
  

_ stock--and—motive power.

 

 

ing than would the railways of the Soviet
Zone... -----.---
The most important factor now limiting the ~

shortage of. serviceable rolling stock and mo-
tive power, the effects of which have-been
most severe in the Soviet Zone. Whereas the
Soviet Zone has less than 60 percent of its pre-__
war freight car and locomotive. inventories in
operation, the Bizone has over-70 percent of
its prewar serviceable inventories available.
The present capabilities of the German rail-
ways as a whole or of any particular zone could

be increased-by-provision of additional rolling
Because of dis- -

and general deterioration, however,
any considerable and sustained increase in the
present traffic of the Soviet Zone would re-.
quire
measures. Since such rehabilitation would

  

 

gency would probably absorb any expansion
of rail capacity in the Soviet Zone, leaving lit-~

tle capacity which could be used for building ~

up local industrial traffic. In the Western
Zones, on the other hand, it is probable that
with added rolling stock the railways could
support not only a large-scale increase in mili-
tary traffic over a more prolonged period, but

might at the same time carry an increased -
__ volume of industrial traffic.

Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Navy, and the Air Force
have concurred in this report; for a dissent by the Intelligence Division, Department
of the Army, see Enclosure A, p. 13. This report is based on information available

to GIA as of June 1949.

srerere 1

concurrently. extensive | rehabilitation — -

be slow, the added military traffic in an emer-_._

i
i
i
4
Page-4
* THE EMERGENCY- CAPABILITIES OF THE.GERMAN RAILWAY SYSTEMS

ue The German railways transported in 1948 level of railway traffic cannot be accurately
: an estimated 276.5 million metric tons of _ determined within the scope of this study, it
: freight, an increase of 17 percent over- the... is nevertheless pertinent to examine the low-__
‘ tonnage hauled in 1947 (see Table A of est modern level in railway traffic on record,
i the Annex). It is probable that the—i948-—In order to estimate the minimum. surplus
: performance represented the appro: capacity which would be available in an emer-
total capacity of the German_rail_| gency, therefore, the following paragraphs
i tems with existing equipment and line facil analyze 1948 traffic in relation to that of the
i ties, although they undoubtedly. retain. ~ depression year 1932, in which the modern-
: a small reserve capacity, particularly in -- German economy probably reached its lowest
the Bizonal area.. The substantially_reduced - prewar level and in which the prewar level of ~~
emergency capabilities.of the: German. rail-_..railway_traffic also reached its lowest point.
ways are apparent when the 1948 traffic figute . Even at that low level, however, the German ~~
is related to Germany's rail performance.in __ standard of living was relatively high com---—
1937, a year of increasing activity in prepara>— ~ pared to many other European countries, and .. —
tion for war. The railways carried_approxi: it _was appreciably higher than that accorded
* mately 499 million metric-tons of: freight he German civilian population during. the
‘ 1937. An estimated 12-percent-of-this.total_latter-stages of World War Il. In a serious —~ __
| traffic, however, was hauled over lines in East. emergency_.. involving ... large-scale. -military———.
: Prussia and in the area east of the Oder and___ movements in Germany.within the foreseeable
Neisse Rivers now under Polish administra----future, the civilian standard of living_would
tion. The traffic in that part of prewar Gei probably-be-reduced by the _power_or powers .. ——
many corresponding to the present bounda- --- controlling the area to a level which would'be _
ries, therefore, amounted to about 439 million. considerably lower than the 1932 level.
tons in 1937, In relation to this tonnage, the Ton-kilometers performed over the German ~
approximate 1948 capacity of the Gerinan rail-— railways in 1948 (estimated at 47.25 billion)
ways represents only about 63 percent of their exceeded the 1932 performance for the corre-
activity in 1937. sponding area (about 39.14 billion) by about... —
Expressed in terms of ton-kilometers, which 20 percent. Even if civilian requirements for
provide a more accurate index of railway a ilway traffic were not reduced below the vol-
tivity than tons hauled, German rail-traffi iling in 1932, therefore, the German
in 1948 was also considerably below the 1937 ‘would additionally be capable of per-
performance. It is estimated-that the to’ ~forming at least 8 billion ton-kilometers an-
kilometers performed by all German railways nually of occupational or military traffic, irre-
in 1948 may have totaled as high as 47.25 bil-- ~ spective of the small reserve capacity retained
lion. The 1937 ton-kilometer_trafMc, again py the-railways in 1948. This represents

excluding 12 percent of the total to'account _ ,, P : + A
nen . _ roughly 22 million ton-kilometers a day which,
for territorial losses, amounted to about 70.19 ~ on the basis of the 1948 average haul of about

billion for an area comparable to postwar 179 Kilometers, would provide a potential ca-
Germany. The 1948 performance, therefore, pacity of about 130,000 metric tons daily which
represents about 67 percent of the adjusted coud be devoted to the objectives of the mili-

1937 trafic. tary authorities.

The present potential reserve capacity of (The following estimate is advanced merely
the German railways would be the surplus to suggest the order of magnitude of the osti-
above the irreducible minimum of civilian re- mated potential surplus railway capacity in-
quirernents. Although the minimum civilian volved in this analysis. No attempt is made

 
   
 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

SECRET 3
Page-5
in this study to evaluate either the need for
such reserve railway capacity or the ability of
the controlling authorities to exploit such ca-
pacity under any given set of circumstances...
Past US experience in the European theater
indicates that an average of abeut .03 metric
tons of supplies per man per day is necessary doubtedly-already allocated to military re-

to maintain basic divisions and requisite serv-_
It appears, there- ..

ice and air support forces.

fore, that a daily railway surplus _of 130,000 of occupa
metric tons, if fuily exploited, would represent freight moving out of Germany to the Eas'

a capacity equivalent to the supply require
ments of about four million basic US person:
nel and supporting forces, excluding initial
equipment. This volume of traffic, howeve
could undoubiedly sustain _a~.considerabl;
larger Soviet force.)

As related to 1932, furthermore; the bulk of

 

this over-all surplus capacity.would be pri
ently available in the Bizone.~
annual 8 billion ton-kilometer differential be-

 

tween the two years, over ‘T-billion ton-kilo-"_
meters apply to the Bizone alone, where_rail- With respec

way traffic was an estimated 28 percent
greater in 1948 than in_the corresponding.
gion in 1932. It is not possible to determine
from presently available data the proportio
of the remaining 1 billion ton-kilometers

 

be attributed to the French and Soviet Zones, ably had over 70 percent of its prewar motive ~~

respectively. Their combined increase over

1932 traffic, however, amounted to only 7 per-—~~ It is undoubtedly true that the present ca

  

 

    
   
   
   

 

capable of sustaining a far greater volume of
military traffic without reducing the standard
of living below the subsistence level than are
the railways of Eastern Germany. The latter ,
conclusion is strengthened by the fact that a
larger share of current railway traffic is un-

quirements in the Soviet Zone than in West-
ern Germany, in view of the greater strength
_of 0c; ional forces and the large volume of

 

The most important factor limiting the ca-
-pabilities of all German railways has been
heir shortage of serviceable rolling stock and
jocomotives.~ The effects of this shortage have
probably been most severe in the Soviet Zone,
where the railways were operating in 1948

  
 
  
  

war (1937) serviceable freight_car inventory.

Of the total (see Table B).

In the Bizone, on the other
hand, the serviceable freight car. inventory —
was restored to almest 75 percent of prewar.-

 

shortage of-motive power is also in the Soviet
where the number of available locomo- —

wh
s for German requirements is. prob-
bout 58 percent of the prewar inventory _

(see Table C). In contrast, the Bizone prob-

power. in: operation.

cent. It seems reasonable to assume that the.—- pabilities Of:the German railways as a whole

pattern of railway traffic in the area now con-

stituting the French Zone would have closely ~~

approximated in prewar years that of the Bi-
zonal region, since the two areas included the
great Rhineland industrial complex. The ac-

 

 

or of any particular zone could be increased

 

freight cars. The abilities of Western and

~ Fastern Germany’s railways to accommodate

substantial-and sustained increases_in the

tual disparity, therefore, between— Western” ~ present level of transport requirements, how-
Germany’s capacity in excess of 1932 require- — ever,yary- considerably. While dismantling

ments and that of Eastern Germany is prob-
ably even greater than indicated by the fore-
going statistics.

This analysis demonstrates that despite the
very substantial reduction of the present over-
all capacity of the German_railways. from

normal peacetime levels: (a) the German rail-—~

ways as a whole are now capable of transport-
ing sufficient traffic to accommodate rela-
tively large-scale military movements and si-
multaneously to support a civilian standard

of living above the subsistence level; and (b) -

the railways of Western Germany are now

os

-and general deterioration of the Soviet Zone-
system have reduced its efficiency, it is still
somewhat supevior in relative density to other
Eastern European networks. At present, the
-Soviet Zone railways are undoubtedly capable
of easily accommodating and dispatching to
any part of the Zone the maximum traffic
which can now be handled by the change-of-
gauge transshipment stations on the Polish-
Soviet border. Any large-scale military effort
by the Soviet Union in Europe which required
a sustained increase in the present rail per-
formance of Eastern Germany, however, prob-

 

  

with only an estimated 57 percent of their pre- ~~~ -

 

~to locomotives, the most serious -

 

 

 

 

y the provision of additional locomotives and
Page-6
ably could not be supported hy the railways of
the Soviet Zone without substantial quantities
of repair materials, equipment, rolling stock,
and locomotives. Moreover, even if this mate-
rial were allocated to Eastern Germany, the _

system probably could not also sustain anya

significant industrial activity in the area. In
any event, owing to the deteriorated condition
of the present Soviet Zone system, a considera-
ble and continued increase in its present traf-~
fic could only be realized by extensive rehabil-
itation measures. —___

In the Western Zones, the system is also far

 

below its prewar capacity and efficiency. The ---

 

      

 

rolling stock situation is not, however, so criti-
cal as in the Soviet, Zone, There has been no
extensive postwar dismantling or general de-
terioration, and maintenance and operational
standards have teen considerably higher. As
assuming foreign assistance in

materials and rolling stock to meet the in-

creased requirements of an emergency, itis —~

probable that the railways of Western Ger:
many could support not only large-scale mili-
tary movements over a more prolonged period,

‘put might also be capable of sustaining a rela-

tively higher level of industrial traffic than in”
the case of the Soviet Zone rail system.

{
“|
Page-7
ANN

EX

HISTORICAL, ADMINISTRATIVE. AND STATISTICAL BACKGROUND -

The Prewar Rail Network.— -
For many years prior to World War I, Ger-
many possessed one of the most complex, effi-
cient and best maintained railroad systems _
in the world. Because of its exceptional de--_
velopment and its central location along con-
tinental trunk routes, the German rail system
was an important factor in European trans-
port. Prewar Germany was traversed by nu-
merous international rail— routes. linking
France and the Low Countries with Central
Europe and the Batkans_on.one-hand=an
Ttaly and Switzerland with Scandinavia and
the North Sea on the other. = Despite the in- _
ternational significance of the-German rail<
roads, however, the system_was primarily do-
mestic in character. For example, internal
freight traffic in 1937 accounted for 92 percent --
of total railway freight moved in Germany.
Moreover, the German rail system was by far ——-
the country’s most important transport me-
dium, although Germany also. possessed _
higily developed inland waterways and high-
ways. The German railways carried an esti-
mated 76 percent of all German freight traffic
moved in 1937, as compared to approximately
21.5 percent carried by inland waterways and
2.5 percent on highways. | -
Historically, control of the German railways
was originally separated arnong. the-seven —
constituent States which, from 1871, began-
nationalizing those railways hitherto privately.
owned. In 1919, under the Weimar Republic,
the separate State railways were amalga-—
mated under the central government and in
October 1924 the German State Railway Com-~
pany (Deutsche Reichsbahngeselischaft) was
constituted with the exclusive right to operate
the State railways. With the incorporation
of the Reichsbahn into the political structure
of the Third Reich in 1937, control of the rail-
ways was further centralized and virtually all
German railways were operated by that or-

 

 

 

 

 

AEGRET,,

 

  

  

 

~Effect_of World Wor Il.

tion of Germany.

-- ~ganization -until the_surrender_and occupa:

---At the time of its reorganization in 1937, the

‘Reichsbahn comprised approximately 54,000
route kilometers. The system ranked second

  

in density in all of Europe, with about 12 kilo--
_meters_of track per 100 square kilcmeters of

national territory. Although Berlin was an
important center of rail activity, there were
several other areas of Germany, such as the

Ruhr Valley, which also had extensive rail net---

rks Of a density seldom found in other Euro-

ity of the various national capitals... Approxi-

- 4, mately-40 “percent of the Reichsbahn system

 

consisted of double or multiple-track lines and —-—

“about 4 percent of it was electrified.

In spite of the density of the German rail
network, however, its extent was little more
——_than that existing at the end of World War I.
" Apart from double-tracking of existing routes,
less than 650 kilometers of track on new

“routes was laid in the intervening years,_On

the other hand, for both economic and strate-

gic reasons, a. substantial program of improve-~ -

ment_and modernization of the system had
been carried out. Technical improvements in
the permanent way and in the design of
steam, electric, and Diesel locomotives resulted

 

 

 

 

n. grea
peration of the German railways.

 

__The German railway system bore the major
portion of the country’s military transport
burden and probably reached its peak per-
formances in 1943, The system was under
continual strain from the beginning of the

  

__ war, however, as a result of traffic disruptions

caused by military requirements, damage from
sporadic air attacks, shortages of critical ma-
terials, excessive wartime traffic without ade-
quate maintenance, and the declining effi-
ciency of the labor force. Railway operations

icreased speed and efficiency_ of -
Page-8
8 oo Hornet

deteriorated rapidly following the beginning
of heavy and continued Allied air attacks late
in 1944, and the consequent disruption of

Postwar Organization,

With the end of the war in Europe and the
division of Germany into four zones of occu-

transportation was a roajor factor in the final pation, the German railway system was arbi-

collapse of the German economy. © -=

The region now occupied by the Western _

  
   
 

Powers suffered particularly severe damage -
from the concentrated air attacks onthe
heavy industry throughout the area. For in-

trarily dismembered to conform with the

_zonal demarcations. This was effected irre-

ng administrative or opera-
Furthermore, approximately
_kilometers_of the Reichsbahn (over 20

stance, more than 10 percent of the railway percent of the total German system) located oo

bridges in Bizonia were completely-destroyed——in -the-Polish-administered areas east of the

or heavily damaged. The capacity of the mar-
shalling yards was reduced to 40 percent of-

normal by the end of 1944 and-to about 20 frou

percent by the end of the war. Almost all of
the marshalling yards located in the US-

UK zones were subjected to heavy-and re= ~_
-- ‘When Germany came under occupational .

peated attacks which greatly impeded the
operation of through rail traffic by the close of
the war. The signal and telecommunications
systems were in effect inoperative, and: rail-

road operations in general had been reduced-the ~over-all German . Administration for

to a primitive state.
In the present Soviet Zone of Eastern Ger-
many, about 980 major railway bridges were

destroyed, As was the case in Western Ger- —- way ~Administraticn. . Quadripartite control _

many, key marshalling yards and traffic cen-
ters were high priority targets, although the

damage, in general, was neither as-severe nor

Asa result of the foregoing, German railway
operations had been brought to.a virtual
standstill by the close of the war. Central -
control of traftic broke down completely and
operations became a matter of purely local ex-
pediency. Although there had been only tem-~
porary shortages of locomotives and freight
ears early in the war, which were largely over-_
come by 1941, part of Germany’s rolling stock__
and motive power was dispersed over much of

Europe by 1945, part had been destroyed or ~-

damaged, and that equipment remaining in

Germany, much of which was of foreign ori--—
gin, was in deplorable condition. The Ger- —

man railway system had been reduced by war
from a superior operating condition to a bat-
tered and deteriorated skeleton unable to ac-
cornmmodate adequately even the vastly re-
duced transport require:nents of Germany’s
immediate postwar economy.

 

 

   
  

  
 

 

   

 

Oder-Neisse line and in the portion of East
Prussia tr: ed to the USSR, were severed.
1 man system and are no longer
considered or operated as part of it. . (These

    
      

~ portions of the former German system are not

   
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 

included in this study.)

control, a our-power Transport Directorate
was establist.ed as part of the Allied Control
Council in-Berlin- Under its direction was

Transport, which, in turn, included the-ad-
ministrative instrument for operational con-—--
trol of the German railways, the Central Rail-

of_the_railways_was only partially effective,
however, since each of the occupational powers —
retained final jurisdiction over the lines in its —
zone... ‘The progressive deterioration of four-
power administration of occupied Germany
as now-resulted in the completely separate
‘operation of the Soviet Zone system. The
systems 07 the US and UK Zones are operated
on a bizonal basis and the French Zone-sys-
tem, while independent, is coordinated with
that of the Eizone.

In the Bizone, over-all transport policy is
determined by the occupational authorities
through joint transport advisers. Transport
activities are under the general supervision of
the Bizonal Transportation Administration,
which directs the railways in coordination
with other forms of surface transport. The
‘Céntral Railway Administration, whic!
sponsible to the Transportation Administra
tion, maintains direct operational and ad-
ministrative control and is relatively. inde.”
pendent in its direction of the subordinate a¢d- wo.
ministrative offices or Reichsbahndirektionen.
Plans have been announced, but not yet im-
Page-9
plemented, for the merger of the French Zone
transport administration with that of the Bi-
zone to establish joint direction of all trans-
port activities in Western Germany.
Transportation in the Soviet Zone is or-

stricted Germany’s economic revival, The
extent of Western Europe’s dependence on the
German economy soon became increasingly
apparent, however, and over-all European re-
quirements have caused a gradual modifica-

ganized in a similar fashion. Over-all policy _ tion of the stringent occupation policies. As

control is exercised by the Soviet Military Ad-
ministration (SMA) through the Soviet
Transport Administration. All transport-
tivities are coordinated by the General Tr:
portation Administration and the railways are.

 

  

a result, the railway systems of Western Ger- _
many have benefited from an_increasingly
favorable rehabilitation policy, which has

generally matched the rising level of the over-..
all economy.

operated under the immediate Supervision and —=“"Phe current status of the Bizonal railway

direction of the Central Railway Administra-
tion. Unlike the Bizone, however, the USSR
has stationed military officers throughout the
Fastern German rail organization, even in
many railway stations. Moreover, all Soviet
traffic over the German rail system is moved

system, in terms of equipment, installations,
and facilities, is indicated below:* =>
1. Equipment. .
Rehabilitation of motive power and rolling =
stock has proceeded slowly because of unre-

 

under direct SMA control by special civilian stored repair installations, shortages of raw
crews each commanded-by-a- Soviet officer. materials, sandernourishment and low morale
There are two types of such units,_one of the labor force, and other factors. About-—
including personnel for —the operation of 75 percent of the repair installations have now
trains solely within the -Soviet—Zone— been restored, however, and substantial prog-
a second made up of crews used in long-dis: ss in the repair of freight cars was made d
tance traffic outside_of Germany. Anoth: ing 1948, Moreover, much repair -
agency subordinate -to-the Soviet: Transport "been farmed out to neighboring coun!
Administration is the-German-Soviet Trans- ~~ addition, approximately. 17,0(
port Corporation (Derutra);-a@ Soviet foreign-- cars have been purchased from other Eure
trade unit with Soviet cepresentatives at all... pean countries with ECA-authorized funds for _
levels to supervise reparations and transit ~~ delivery to the Bizone during: the fiscal year
shipment accounts. ~~~ 1948-1949. The inauguration of freight car _
Postwar Occupation-Paligy-and_ Rehabilitation. — production within the Bizone earlier than an-
The immediate railway peo am throughout __ ticipated will probably make available an ade
Germany at the end of hostilities was the ditional 20,000 new cars by the end of 1949
sumption of operations an a scale sufficient -—- At-that time, the estimated annual rate of ~
to provide the minimum-transport capacity _ Production will be 30,000 cars, although in-
necessary to discharge occupational require-. creasing tightness in investment funds may —
ments and accommodate reparations and dis-__have a consider able retarding “effect during ~
mantling shipments. This required the mus- the year. (Additional data concerning Bi-
tering of serviceable rolling stock and the zonal railway equipment are given in Tables -
restoration of 2 minimum number of essential —— Band C.)
lines, instaliations and bridges. Following 2. Bridges.
this initial restoration, the degree of further Only 181 railway bridges now remain com=—
rehabilitation of the German railways has, in — pletely unserviceable. Of the 2,477 bridges
general, reflected the policies of the occupa- ~ destroyed or heavily damaged during the war,
tional powers with respect to the over-all reha-____82 percent have been rebuilt, although many
bilitation of the German economy. of these have been restored on a temporary
In the Western Zones, rail rehabilitation. _ basis.
started slowly because of the extensivencss of
war damage to the rail network and the early
Allied occupation prohibitions which re-

   
 
 
    
 
  

 
  

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

   

* Availabie information concerning the French
Zone system is included in the tables appearing at
the end of this study.

a
Page-10
Cr LEY PT IT

 

100° 2

3. Marshalling Yards.

The yards, in general, have been restored to —-

a fair condition. The highly industrialized
_ Ruhr area, which contained 30 percent of the

marshalling yards of the Bizone, was one of

the most heavily bombed districts in all_of.

Germany. The Ruhr yards, however, have

now been restored sufficiently to meet all nor-
~ mal service requirements.

4. Communications.
The signal and telecommunication system

has been completely restored, with more than ~

50 percent on a permanent basis.. Moreover, _
the special (Basa) telephone net, a fully auto-
matic dial system for rail operations, is again
in operaticri.

5. Other Installations.

An estimated 80-90 percent of other miscel- —- Moreover, there has been no indication of a—_.
laneous railway installations _in- the Bizones

   

have been repaired.

*

trified lines in Central Germany, the USSR
has also removed virtually all of the electric
locomotives, equipment, and even the poles.
Much of the heavy machinery in the repair
shops, as well as signal and other equipment,
“has also been dismantled and removed from
Germany to the East as war booty. The loss
of this machinery has greatly retarded the
freight car repair program of the Zone,

A second detrimental effect of the occupa.
tion upon the railways of Eastern Germany re-
sulted from the Soviet blockade and the West-

‘ern “counterblockade. By cutting off the .
~-Eastern railways from their normal supply
sources for repair and construction materials ~~

in the Western Zones, the blockade severely
affected new construction, reconstruction, re-
pair, and even normal replacement programs.

any significant quantity from its own or Satel--

‘The immediate prospect for the rail system — lite xesousces. . Even the negligible quantity of

of Western Germany is one of continuing —

gradual improvement. Although the system_
is still far below its prewar efficiency and ca.
pacity, it is generally adequate for the presen’
level of the over-all economy and will not pro-~
vide a serious bottleneck in any planned or -
foreseeable German recovery program. —

  
  
   

 

 

_Tolling stock produced in the Soviet Zone since -:

the war has not been made available to the
sy: 4t has been requisitioned or

  

-—Although-the-USSR has given considerable
lip service to contemplated improvements and
‘restoration programs, particularly under. the

In marked contrast to the rail-situation in——S0-Called_two-year plan, few of these appear

Western Germany is that of the Soviet Zone.
The system of Faster Germany_has suffered
extensively from Soviet occupation, in add
tion to the war damage and wartime deterio--
ration experienced by all German railways.
Principal among the consequences of the oc-
cupation in Eastern Germany. have been the
losses suffered by the railways as a result
of the drastic dismantling and reparations
program conducted by the USSR. For.
example, the route mileage of the Reichsbahn
in the Soviet Zone has been reduced by an es---
timated 3,200 kilometers tnrough Soviet dis-

 

 

   

"to have been implemented. Tacit Soviet ap-

f Gernian construction requests: is
id by failure to provide the requi-
‘site materials. Some restorations, however,
have been made, or are in progress:

1. Of 980 major Soviet Zone railway bridges
destroyed, about 89 percent have been re-
paired. Oniy 30 percent of the repaired
bridges, however, have been permanently re-
‘stcred. The valance have been repaired on
‘an emergency basis requiring crossings at re-

  

 

_ @uced speeds and loads.

2. A portion of the rail connection between

__the ports of Rostock-Warnemiinde and Berlin

inantling, and now consists of about 7,000 kilo-——" nich was completely dismantled is prob-

meters of primarily single-track lines. (As
previously indicated, about 12,300 additional
route kilometers were lost to Poland and the
USSR through postwar territorial changes.)
About 90 percent of the formerly double-track
lines in the area have now been reduced to
single-track status, From the formerly elec-

ably now restored on a single-track basis to
expedite movements in this area and to the
south,

3. Restoration cf dismantled second tracks
on certain lines running out of Dresden is be-
lieved to be in progress, Although restora-
tion of the entire Berlin-Dresden route to dou-

SEGRE

on to provide such materials in

ed to the USSR aS reparations» ————
Page-11
wRPCREE”

ble-track status is reportedly contemplated, it -
is unlikely to be accomplished in the immedi-
ate future because of shortages of construc-
tion materials,

4. A short section of line -known as the
Zossen cut-off is reported to have been com-
pleted, thus making it unnecessary for Soviet
trains approaching Berlin from the south to —.

- transit the US Sector,
Because of Soviet indifference-to-German—- mately their present level, it will probably be

economic requirements, the railway system of

Eastern Germany has been allowed to deterio---_ the transport requirements of even the greatly -

-Western Zones.) Although the system” will

 

iL

of permissible weight per train, for example,
is estimated to have been at least 25 percent _
below the prevailing capacity in the Western
Zones in 1948. (Soviet Zone trains were re-
portedly limited to a weight of 900 tons, in
contrast to 1,200-1,500-tons per train in the

remain adequate for Soviet economic and mili-
tary requirements, if they remain at approxi+

subject to increasing strain in order to provide

ee ne rman

rate gradually. Its line capacity ‘in=terms: reduced economic level of Eastern Germany... —~

_ TABLE-A

RAILWAY.FREIGHT TRAFFIC (REICHSBAHN) =

“Tons Hauled ~~

(millions of metic tons, excluding only
railway-service=freight- and: livestock)

 

  

ee 1932-2 - 19371948 1947-1948
Germany 266.8'——- 499.0' 202.9 23660 :
Bizone sees 277.0 138.0
Soviet Zone 170.0 44.9
French Zone §2.0 20.0

* Estimated.

 

1Includes traffic estimated at_32 million tons in 1932 and 60 million in 1937 hauled over lines in East” ~~
Prussia and in the area east of the Oder-Neisse line now Polish-adminiszered.

Ton-Kilometers~ Performed

(billions of ton-kilometers)

 

 

 

199220 1937 1948 -
Germany 44.48% see 79.76* 41.25
Bizone 216 0 ATT 32.25
Soviet Zone sees eee 10.20 *
French Zone 4.80 *
* Estimated.

2 Includes traffic estimated at 5.34 billion ton-kilometers in 1932 and 9.57 billion in 1937 hauled over
lines in Fast Prussia and in the area east of the Oder-Neisse line now Polish-administered.

Note: Rarly in 1949, freight car loadings were averaging 36-38,000 per day in the Bizone and an estimated

14,000 per day in the Soviet Zon>

sDeRner
Page-12
“42. _- SECRET

 

TABLE B locomotives are estimated to have been in the pres-
Te enuaN AAD ent Soviet Zone. ~ .
FREIGHT CAR INVENTORY *As of January 1946.
(thousands of cars) As of March 1948, there were an estimated 7,018

nj locomotives _ in _the Soviet Zone. Of these, 2,535
were completely unserviceable, elther because they
were damaged beyond repair or because their repair... a

Soviet Frenc:
Germany Bizone Zone Zone

 

     

 

 

 

   
  
   
  

1937
2 was impossible as a result of existing conditions ~~
Total 578.3* 342.5 165.77 70.1 (this figure includes 1,148. foreign . locomotives).
Serviceable 554.2 327.9 159.1' 67.2 __ Another. 1,656 were under repair, 425 were used ¢x-
1946 clusively by Soviet Brigades for reparation - ship-—~
- = ments, and 3 ere set aside as a reserve for winter
Sons ccable aera ae ao oe ~ trafic, leaving @ balance of about 2,050 locomotives
. ” * ~ “(including 102 foreign) to meet German traffic re-
1947 quirements.
Total 462.1 320.7° 923 491 *As of October 1948,
Serviceable 335.6 235.2* 62.8 37.6 ~~ ‘As of December 1948, there were an estimated
1948 7,007 locomotives in the Soviet Zone, of which 2,522 - *
Total 429.4 304.0' 90.4350 _-. Were completely unserviceable, 1,565 were under re- =

 

~~ pair, 250 were reserved for Soviet Military Adminis=—
26.4. tration use only, and_69 wer? held in reserve for —
rs emergency —requirements. This . left- about — 2,600

‘Probably reached a total of nearly 700,000 ims~=~ serviceable locomotives for German requirements.
mediately prior to the war.

Includes East Prussia and the area east -of.the—
Oder-Neisse line; approximately - 125,000 freight _ —
cars were used in the present Soviet Zone, of which —D.
an estimated 120,000 were serviceable. =

* As of December 1947.

‘As of November 1948.

Serviceable 337.9 243.3‘ 68.2

 

 

— TABLE D

   
 
  

 

   

(thousands of kilometers) ——

 

 

 

Note: These figures are all estimates, with the ex-== 1937
ception of the Bizone - statistics -for_ 1948. 54.0 ———.—
Foreign rolling stock in use in the various - : $19. 315.
oceupation zones is included... .-. - Soviet Zone 98
East Prussia and
TABLE C __ area east of
___Oder-Neisse lin 12.3

  

 

LOCOMOTIVE INVENTORY
{thousands of locomotives) -—

  

 

+ Exeluding-an estimated 3,200 kilometers disman--

 

 

_ - tled by the USSR.
Germany Wranee Soviet ~~ Including - 11,000- kilometers In - Polish-adminis.—
1937 - tered territory in East Prussia and east of the Oder:

Neisse line,-and 1,300 kilometers in Soviet-admin-—-

    
 

 

Yotal 20.7 13.3 istered East
Berviceable 18.5
1943
Total 278 20.4... Tat ~ a
Serviceable NA, 8.5 NA.
1947
Total 23.5 165 7.0° .
Serviceable 9.8 7.0 2.8° French 222225
1948 Bizone Zone
Total 23.3 146° 70° 1.7 —

Serviceable 11.5 719°" 29° 07 a
‘These figures are all estimates, with the exception
of the Bizone statistics for 1943.

‘Includes East Prussia and the area east of the
Oder-Neisse line; not more than 4,500 serviceable

SECRET ~
Page-13
:
ot
i
4
“y

 

 

Ae Sree

ENCLOSURE A

DISSENT BY THE INTELLIGENCE DIVISION =
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

Although this study embodies a useful sum-. .._ In estimating the annual potential capacity. ___
mary of the German civilian economy insofar — (8 Billion Ton-Kilometers) of the German
as the German railway systems are concerned, — Tailways which could be devoted to the objec
it appears to be deficient in treatment of the ~ tives of-the military authorities, it appe:
railway operational factors involved. Te eis Daced one 1992 statistics We a
lack of adequate basic assumptions, at ined believe-this-a-rather unrealistic approach to
with unconvincing statistical support, leads tn. problem-of determining the emergency -
us to the opinion that the study, although . potential of the German transportation sys- -
excellent in many respects, is inadequate for —~ tem and suggest that possibly an analysis and ~~~
the determination of the potential under comparison of conditions around 1937 would ~~~
emergency conditions, of the Gérman railway more accurately present the relative positions _

systems. of civilian and military transport capabilities...