
Page-1
NIE 11-7-66
col LLED DISSEM 28 April 1966

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-7-66

Trends in Soviet General Policies

  

CIA HISZORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
Soha op RELEASE IN FULL
WAP fae

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE 8OARD

As indicated overleaf

28 APRIL 1966

Authenticated:

atl ruil.

Colonel, USAF .
ACTING EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, USIB

a Ne 808
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, the NSA, and AEC.

* Concurring:

Dr. R. J. Smith for Deputy Director of Central intelligence

Mr. George C. Denney, Jr., for the Director of Intelligence and Research, Depart-
ment of State

lieutenant General Joseph F. Carroll, USAF, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Lieutenant General Marshall S. Carter, USA, Director of the National Security
Agency

Dr. Charles: H. Reichardt for Assistant General Manager for Administration, Atomic
Energy Commission

Abstaining:
Mr. William ©. Cregar, for Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the subject being outside of his jurisdiction.

   
   
  

e National Defense of the United States
18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information affectin;
within the meaning of the espionage la)
Page-3
A

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM
CONCLUSIONS
DISCUSSION

I. THE LEADERSHIP
Il. INTERNAL POLICIES
IIL. FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Outlook

 

Page

ll
Page-4
TRENDS IN SOVIET
GENERAL POLICIES

THE PROBLEM

To estimate main trends in Soviet internal and foreign policy over
the next year or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. After the stormy years of Khrushchev, the Soviet Union seems
to have settled down. The new leaders have framed a number of
new policies, which are more realistic in terms of Soviet capabilities.
In general these policies are more conservative. Internally, the leaders
are trying to tighten up; they are trying to control the various spon-
taneous forces set loose under Khrushchev. Externally, they have
given first attention to problems in the Communist world, particularly
the challenge of China. They seem fairly well satisfied with the
results thus far, and probably intend no great change in the near
future.

B. However, there are trouble spots. There are tensions between
the regime and the intelligentsia. Economic plans are still to ambi-
tious and their failure would sharpen the question of how far and fast
to go with reforms, particularly in introducing the “profit” system.
Further strains on the allocation of economic resources are likely to
be imposed by the demands of the military and space programs, and
the ambitious agricultural plan. Though Brezhnev has emerged as
the regime’s leading figure, the ultimate locus of power and the man-
ner of its exercise are far from settled.

C. As for foreign policy the regime has done well in isolating the
Chinese and regaining positions in Asia lost by Khrushchev, but much
will depend on what happens in Vietnam. The Soviets probably want
the war to end soon, preferably by negotiations. But they do not

SEGRET 1
Page-5
oh

yet have this much influence in Hanoi, and they will probably have
to stick by their present policies—continued military aid and political
support, but limited actual Soviet involvement. US-Soviet relations
have been constricted by the Vietnamese war and no significant im-
provements are likely as long as the war continues.

D. In Europe, the Soviets will be more active ceeking to exploit
de Gaulle’s disruptive maneuvers within NATU However, there is
not too much they can do as long as their policy is fixed on the division
of Germany. An active policy is likely to be continued along the wide
arc of countries south and east of the USSR. The Soviets have made
progress in this area—Turkey, Iran, India, Pakistan, Japan—and will
try to consolidate their gains at the expense of both China and the West.
Page-6
SEGKET

DISCUSSION

1. The 23rd Congress of the Soviet Party confirmed the main lines of foreign
and domestic policy that have been gradually evolving since the fall of Khru-
shchey, Managed in the business-like fashion which is the image cultivated by
the new leaders, the Congress produced no spectacular surprises and no broad
new initiatives.

1. THE LEADERSHIP

2. In the 18 months since Khrushchev’s removal, his successors have managed
rather well in running the country without serious political upheaval and in
setting their own stamp on the whole range of Soviet foreign and domestic
policies. Within the framework of collective leadership, however, friction has
continued over both policies and power positions. For the time being, Brezhnev
has emerged as the leading figure of the group.

3. This apparent stability is probably related both to the personalities of the
leading politicians and to the peculiar circumstances of the USSR at this time.
Neither Brezhnev nor any of the other leaders appear to possess the highly
combative spectacular style of conduct that characterized Khrushchev. To a
great extent the new regime has established the rule of the party bureaucrat,
and this encourages policies and practices which are less upsetting to the estab-
lished order. There has been marked tendency for political decisions to come
down near the center of the Soviet political spectrum.

4. Nevertheless, there is some evidence that each major policy decision has
produced some contention. This has not resulted in a political upheaval, in
part because the regime has not been under the pressure of acute crises. And,
in addition, much of the regime's activity has been negative, a discarding of
Khrushchev’s organizational superstructure and methods—presumably reflect-
ing a basic anti-Khrushchev consensus that evolved while he was still in com-
mand and resulted in his removal.

5. Prospects. We think the outlook over the next year or so is for a con-
tinuation of the present situation. The “collective” leadership will probably
endure for this period. In our view this means that, though some individuals
will gain in influence and others slip from power, no single person is likely to
amass powers approximating those of Khrushchev. This should provide an
element of continuity and stability in major policy Belds.

6. At the same time, the struggle for leadership will continue and perhaps
become more intense. There is still a large requirement for a central point of
command and authority, and this point tends to be the party leader. Brezhnev
appears to be following a classic pattern by gradually enhancing his own position,
most recently acquiring Stalin’s old title of General Secretary.

SEQRET 3
Page-7
SEQRET

7. Thus collective leadership may break down through the efforts of the Gen-
eral Secretary to expand his position, or through the efforts of the others to
circumscribe or remove him. The durability of collective leadership also depends
to some extent on how critical the problems are, particularly the domestic ones.
Thus far the leaders have demonstrated a willingness to compromise on many
of the very issues which in the past proved the most di ive—agriculture and
the allocation of economic priorities. This suggests that it may be some time
before specific policy issues become so acute that alternative and opposing policy
lines will be sharpened to the point of provoking an overt power struggle. In
addition to personal ambitions, the most likely causes for eventually undermining
the prevailing balance are the perennial problems of the USSR: the economic
issues, including defense; the proper relationship between the party and the state
administration; and the question of policy toward the intellectuals. And, of
course, serious foreign policy setbacks could cause differences among the leaders.
Finally, the entire question of how to deal with Stalin, which was skirted at
the Party Congress, could prove to be the most immediately explosive.

 

I. INTERNAL POLICIES

8. The present leadership has assumed a distinctly more orthodox character
than Khrushchev's. In most fields of internal policy, except for some aspects of
economics, the regime has sought to curb the more liberal tendencies that were
evolving under Khrushchev.

9. The Party. The plight of the party was an important cause of the return
to a more fundamentalist Communist outlook. By his frequent reorganizations,
his insistence on the party’s more direct management of the economy, his per-
missiveness toward dissident writers, and his repeated waves of de-Stalinization,
Khrushchev had gone far in disorienting the party professionals. The party was
expanding rapidly, and many technicians and specialists were being admitted
to membership. Disarray in the international Communist movement also con-
tributed to the erosion of the party's confidence in its power and doctrine.

10. The new leadership has made a considerable effort to counter this trend.
There has been a consistent concern to stress the party's authority over all fields
of endeavor and to revive the morale and elan of the party worker. Though the
party's direct participation in the detailed management of economic affairs has
been reduced, its command and contro! system for policy decisions has been
recentralized. Ideological indoctrination and the practical value of theory have
been greatly reemphasized; potential infringements on the party's sovereignty
such as the investigating authority of the Party-State Control Committee, have
been abolished. Central Committee meetings have been held more often, and
the participation of non-party specialists from outside interest groups has been
reduced. The regime apparently intends to slow down the expansion of the
party; stricter criteria have been laid down for membership; the quota for tumn-
over in leading party personnel has been abolished. This general line of en-
hancing the prestige and moral authority of the party explains in part the revival
of old terminology—e.g., politburo.

4 SEQRET
Page-8
SEGRET

ll. The desire to build up the party's image confronts the current leaders
with the problem of Stalin’s reputation. They are clearly interested in undoing
the extremes to which Khrushchev went in denigrating his predecessor, yet they
recognize that any very explicit efforts at rehabilitation could stir up a storm
within the USSR and throughout Eastern Europe. They have apparently not
yet fixed on the proper way to cope with the problem; certainly they had no
solution in hand at the time of the 23rd Congress, when the issue was virtually
ignored.

12. The effort to enhance the party's prestige and influence may exacerbate,
rather than heal, underlying tonflicts in the USSR. It is hard for a small power
elite to exercise total control of the complex social and economic problems of
an advanced industrial society. The pressures for greater freedom—personal,
intellectual, and artistic—have become more insistent. The effectiveness of
reforms in economic policy and organization requires greater participation by
technicians, greater respect for expert opinion, and more freedom of decision at
lower levels. But recent trends indicate that there is considerable resistance
to such a loosening up of Soviet society. Many forces within Soviet society—
the secret police, the military, the Stalinist literary coteries—all find a tradi-
tionalist political climate more compatible with their aims and ideas. The
groundwork is thus being prepared for a future conflict.

13. This resistance to change is by no means a return to Stalinism. The
control of the party over the secret police and the military will almost certainly
continue. Shifts to harsher methods, such as recent repressions of liberal
writers, still have fairly well established limits. The reaction of the Soviet
intelligentsia to the arrest and trial of two liberal writers and to the rumored
rehabilitation of Stalin indicates a continuing vitality among the more pro-
gressive elements in the Soviet scene. And professional economists such as the
Liberman School, who are of a more modern, unorthodox persuasion by Soviet
standards, have made considerable headway. Nevertheless, in terms of the
evolution of Soviet society, the present period appears to be a stagnant one.

14. The Economy.1 The Five-Year Plan for 1966-1970 has set the new
regime's course of economic policy. Not only does it establish less extravagant
goals than Khrushchev did, but it addresses many of the chronic problems that
have plagued the Soviet economy during the past five years. - The plan is never-
theless ambitious. It seeks to regain the growth rates of the 1950s, raise in-
dustrial output, narrow the gap between heavy and light industry, double
investment in agriculture, increase the efficiency of industrial management,
and do all this without having to reduce military and space programs.

15. The plan looks toward an economic growth averaging 6.5-7 percent
annually, a rate comparable to the good years in the late 1950s and considerably
better than our estimate of 4.5 percent average of the past five years. This
optimistic projection does not rely on significantly greater injections of labor

‘A detailed estimate of the USSR’s economy will be provided in NIE 11-5-66.

SGRET 5
Page-9
Ss ET

and capital than in the past. Instead, the plan depends on squeezing from
these inputs a substantially greater return in both industry and agriculture.

16. As before, performance in the agricultural sector will be a decisive factor
in the regime's economic prospects. In every respect, the agricultural program
introduced by Brezhnev is an ambitious undertaking: a 25 percent rise in total
agricultural output over the plan period; a 30 percent rise in grain production;
total investments of $78 billion; sizable increases in deliveries of machinery,
especially trucks to agriculture; and a number of measures to stimulate individual

“efforts through material rewards. The program is costly and requires a steady,
persistent effort, free from the meddling’ of the political leadership. The regime
is also making the questionable assumption that existing institutions and _prac-
tices are appropriate for effectively absorbing these great new inputs. Weather,
of course, may prove a more critical factor than all the careful planning done
in Moscow. All things considered, however, the Soviet Union seems embarked
on a serious and extended effort greatly to increase agricultural output by 1970.

17. Another major factor in Soviet economic performance will be the weight
of the military and space programs. The available data do not permit precise
estimates, but it appears that the Five-Year Plan allows for a rise in expenditures
for these sectors. Indirect evidence, including the statements of the political
leaders, suggests a political climate favorable for the military establishment and
for an expanding military effort. Even if the rates of growth planned for
national income and productivity fall below the ambitious plan, military and
space expenditures can still grow at a moderate pace. But if there is a general
failure in economic performance, the claims of military and space programs are
likely to become critical: At best, the competition for resources will continue,
and it will become more acute if the economy's performance falls substantially
below the planners’ expectations.

18. By 1970, according to plan, the light consumer goods industry will finally
have attained a growth rate comparable to that of heavy industry. Consumer
hard goods will become more plentiful, quality should improve, and, on paper
at least, light industry is no longer to be the orphan of the economy. However,
the prospect for a substantial rise in the standard of living is only fair. His-
torically, all Soviet plans have promised much and delivered less to the con-
sumer, and it seems likely that, over the plan period, political and economic
pressures will again lead to a downgrading of light industry.

19. Economic Reform. The Soviet leadership is pinning many of its economic
hopes on a series of reforms in industrial management. These reforms, which
were introduced by Kosygin last September, are designed over the long run to
give industrial managers greater freedom—in hiring and firing, in arranging
contracts with customers and suppliers, in setting work assignments, and in
distributing bonuses. Efficiency is to be improved, not only by tying bonuses
more closely to individual performance, but also by charging enterprises for
the use of fixed and working capital and by crediting enterprises only with
Boods actually sold rather than with goods produced. Three features cast doubt
Page-10
SEQKET

on the success of the reforms. First, Moscow will still make the key decisions:
the quantity and assortment of output, the amount and type of investment, the
rate of introduction of new technology, and the size of the wage fund. Secondly,
the profitability of enterprises is highly dependent on the prices set for their
raw material and finished products, yet present price schedules are obsolete
and are now undergoing a long and complicated revision. Thirdly, there is
considerable question about the willingness and capability of Soviet managers
to adapt to the new system.

20. The Economic Outlook. Given the questionable prospects for agriculture
and the probable heavy impact of military and space spending, we think the
regime's plan is overly optimistic and depends too much on every sector in-
creasing its efficiency rapidly. The economic reforms could provide an initial
stimulus, as Khrushchev’s 1957 reorganization did, but they may prove so
disruptive as to hamper production. Over the longer term, there is likely to
be even greater bureaucratic resistance and interference, and further high level
policy conflict over the pace of reforms. If so, then uncertainty and confusion
may actually reduce the chances for better economic performance. In any
event, the overall economic outlook is only fair. Since the planned rates of
growth are not likely to be achieved, hard economic choices will continue to
confront the regime.

21. As always, the political factor weighs heavily in any estimate of Soviet
economic prospects. The present plans require a stable leadership and agree-
ment on the main lines of policy. Moreover, the Soviet economy has little
flexibility or margin for error. The policy of reasserting the role of the party
and the trend toward orthodoxy could frustrate plans for effective reform and
hence impede a rise in productivity. If performance fails to meet expectations,
there will be a strong tendency to blame the reforms, but there will also be
counter pressure to implement them more rapidly and fully. Thus, political
contention over economic policies and the reform program will probably become
acute if the economy fails to display the vitality that is hoped for.

22. The Military.? Special mention should be made of the improved position
of the military. Though the party fully intends to exercise close control, a
number of circumstances have probably combined ‘to increase the relative in-
fluence of the military leaders in their field of competence. Unlike Khrushchev,
the present political leaders have not yet entered into public debates on military
doctrine. There is also a serious concern over the Vietnamese war, the im-
plications for the USSR of the buildup and expansion of the US armed forces,
and the growing power of China, all of which make the civilian leadership look
for expert military counsel. Moreover, in a collective leadership, a single in-
dividual is not likely to take the lead in setting himself against professional
military advice without guarantees of broad support. Thus we believe that the
Soviet military establishment now finds itself in a better position to get a hearing
for its special interests and policies than in recent years.

* Soviet military policy will be more fully discussed in NIE 11-4-66, scheduled for May 1968.

safle 7
Page-11
SEQRET

Ill. FOREIGN AFFAIRS

23. Though the Sovict leaders have seemed more preoccupied with domestic
matters than foreign affairs, there have been noteworthy changes in some aspects
of Sovict foreign policy as well. In a sense, as in domestic affairs, a more
conservative view of the international situation has evolved. This trend in
foreign affairs has been reflected mainly in a reordering of priorities: the Soviets
seem most concerned with the immediate problems and issues of the Communist
world. As a result, Soviet policy has been focused on the China problem and,
within this context, the Vietnamese war.

24. There is no indication that the new regime has radically new or different
views concerning the various factors and conditions which must shape Soviet:
conduct. Doubtless, they still see their military power as serving two basic
purposes—defending the USSR and expanding its influence. However, they
apparently estimate that the present balance of power in the world does not
permit the more aggressive and assertive policy which characterized Soviet
conduct during the Berlin crises and the Cuban missile venture. At the same
time, however, the Soviets have also muted the attempt to create an atmosphere
of a detente with the US and have redefined their peaceful coexistence strategy
in somewhat more negative terms. In sum, the Soviets apparently see the
present period as an unfruitful one, either for major accords with the West or
major gains at its expense.

25. The China Problem. The Soviets have been generally successful over
the past vear in isolating China within the Communist world. Chinese mis-
calculations, Soviet tactics, and a measure of good luck have all played a part
in this success, symbolized by the presence at the Soviet Party Congress of
almost all Communist parties, despite the Chinese boycott. The Soviets have
been willing to contest the Chinese more actively while persisting in pleas for
“united” Communist action. They have avoided public polemics, while main-
taining the essence of their ideological and political position. This approach
has enabled the Soviets to shift much of the blame for continuing the dispute
onto Peking.

26. In view of this record, the Soviets will almost cértainly continue this
general approach. Meanwhile, the Soviets probably have an interest in keeping
the door open to China in the event a post-Mao leadership reexamiines its in-
creasingly isolated position.

27. Vietnam. Both the Chinese and the Soviets have made the Vietnamese
war a key issue in their dispute. The future course of the war may prove
the decisive test of whether the Soviets can consolidate their gains against the
Chinese. At this point, the Soviet leaders themselves probably have no clear
idea where the war is leading. In our view, their own preference probably is
for a negotiated settlement. At the same time, the contest with China for influ-
ence in Hanoi also pushes Moscow in the direction of greater support for the
war. But the Soviets clearly appreciate the dangers and risks of confrontation
with the US. Thus Soviet policy is truly caught in a dilemma.

de
Page-12
SEQRET

28, In such a situation, there is always the possibility that frustrations, pres-
sures, and unforescen developments will draw Soviet policy onto a more radical
course. The USSR might disengage from its commitment of support, or, more
plausibly, it might sharply increase its involvement through employment of
new ‘weapons and Soviet personnel or through putting pressures on the US in
other areas. While we recognize these possibilities, we think it more likely
that ‘the Soviets will continue roughly along present lines, supplying military
aid as necessary, but mainly in defensive systems, seeking the while to limit
their own risks. They are likely to await new opportunities to exert influence
on Hanoi in the direction of settling the war. Though the Soviet position in
Hanoi has improved, it is doubtful that the USSR yet has the influence to
persuade the DRV to alter its stand. Nor can the Soviets afford independent
political initiatives or any semblance of cooperation with the US on the Viet-
namese issue,

29. Relations with the US. US-Soviet relations will be largely restricted by
the Vietnamese war. The Soviets would probably accept a further worsening
in relations if dictated by their interests in Hanoi. Even before the USSR’s
involvement in Vietnam, the Sovict leadcrs probably had decided that the
prospect of restoring their position in the Communist world was well worth
some deterioration in relations with the US. But they have also displayed an
awareness that th:s could go too far. We expect that they will try to contain
the effects of Vietnam and to maintain contacts and channels for the future,
when and if the Vietnamese war is settled.

30. Europe. At the Party Congress the Soviets began to lay the groundwork
for a more active European policy. Their general view, as expressed by
Gromyko, is that the Western bloc is loosening and that contradictions and
tensions afford the opportunity for the Soviets to deal independently with each
of the Western allies. Now the Soviets seem prepared to test this thesis with
direct contacts and, probably, renewed proposals in the realm of European
security.

31. The new line will probably be conciliatory fargely out of deference to
de Gaulle, in the hope of encouraging him to carry out disruptive actions within
the Western Alliance | Many well-worn proposals are likely to be reworked
to test European reactions: the reduction of armaments and troops in Central
Europe, stabilization of European frontiers, prohibition on deployment or
transfer of nuclear weapons. As for Germany, Soviet concern that French
actions will enhance West Germany’s influence in NATO may heighten Moscow's
interest in some improvement in relations with the FRG. Thus, despite an
intransigeant public posture, the USSR will maintain a certain flexibility in its
attitude toward Bonn. Because of this desire to exploit and explore the possible
consequences of French withdrawal from NATO, the Berlin question is likely
to remain quiescent.

32. However, unless the Soviets are prepared to change their German policy,
which is highly unlikely, there is not much they can offer to Paris or Bonn.
Page-13
f,
SPRET

Morcover, in our view the Soviets continue to believe that no European settle.
ment can be consummated without the participation of the US, which remains
the preferred partner for a dialogue.

33. Eastern Europe. Soviet relations with Eastern Europe have settled into
a fairly consistent pattern, and the USSR seems to be paying more heed to
the views of the Eastern bloc than it did under Khrushchev. The reluctance
of Soviet leaders to raise the unsettling question of Stalin at the Party Congress
-in part probably reflects this change in attitude. This trend toward a more
practical working relationship seems likely to continue, though frictions are bound
to arise now and then, particularly over the problem of economic relations. The
Soviet leaders would like to tighten up the Warsaw Pact organization, but they
will probably remain unwilling to take any bold initiative in the face of continuing
opposition from a number of countries, particularly Rumania.

34. Non-Proliferation. This is another field in which the Soviets have virt ally
stood still, partly because of Vietnam, but mainly because of their overriding
concern with the question of nuclear weapons and Germany. In our view, the
Soviets have a: growing interest in a non-proliferation agreement; but they are
more concerned that Germany acquire no voice in the use of nuclear weapons.
Moscow is likely, therefore, to continue its resistance to any agreement that did
not foreclose this issue without qualification. As long as the non-proliferation
question remains open, the Soviets will probably be reluctant to move on other
arms control questions.

 

35. The Underdeveloped Countries. For several years we have characterized
Soviet policy toward the “third world” as a vigorous effort to displace Western
influence and build up a strong Soviet position. While this has been generally
true, there has also been a gradual scaling down of Soviet expectations in gen-
eral, and a somewhat more selective approach in particular. This has become
more evident under the new leadership. Africa seems to receive more perfunc-
tory attention in present Soviet policy, and the USSR has played no role of
importance in the Rhodesian crisis. As for Latin America, the Soviets felt com-
pelled to tone down the more militant aspects of the Tri-Continent Conference
in Havana.

36. The present Soviet regime seems able to accept setbacks in these areas
with fairly good grace, perhaps reflecting a more realistic view that instability
in the underdeveloped countries is inevitable. The problem of Algeria illustrates
the difficulties for Moscow in evolving a successful policy of dealing with one-
party, non-Communist regimes. The Algerian delegation to the Soviet Party
Congress walked out because of the presence of Algerian Communists. Yet the
Soviets are committed to providing military aid to Algeria, and this has con-
tinued despite the removal of Ben Bella and the new Algerian regime's more
hostile attitude toward local Communists.

37. The Middle East and Asia. A striking feature of Soviet diplomacy last
year was the concerted effort to improve Moscow’s position along the wide arc

10 SI T
Page-14
Ss T

of countries stretching from Turkey through India and Southeast Asia to Japan.
This effort began with an adjustment of the Soviet position on Cyprus and a
consequent improvement of relations with Turkey. Foreign aid agreements
were completed with Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan, these three countries accounting
for 80 percent of new Soviet aid commitments. A great impetus for Soviet
policy was provided by the successful mediation of the India-Pakistan dispute
at the Tashkent meeting. Despite significant obstacles to improvement of rela-
tions with Japan, the USSR has nevertheless made Progress, particularly in the
economic field. Military aid, particularly in Syria, Iraq, and India, continues
to be an important Soviet instrument for improving the USSR’s position.

38. Kosygin’s scheduled visits manifest an active interest in the UAR, Turkey,
and India. The Soviets will continue to try to balance their assistance and
support for India with an effort to consolidate their increased influence in
Pakistan. The Soviets will be seeking to loosen Turkey's relations with both
NATO and CENTO and of Iran's and Pakistan’s relations with CENTO. Con-
tinued Soviet concern over Laos is evident, and the Laotian King’s visit is
planned this summer. In short, the Soviets are likely to continue a very active
policy in the areas south and east of the USSR, not only to further their anti-
China policy but also to strengthen their general position in areas where they
probably believe the US is losing ground.

39. In Indonesia the decline of Sukarno and the destruction of the Commu-
nist Party raises serious questions for the Soviets. While they are undoubtedly
gratified at the Chinese setback, they will not wish the US to establish a pre-
dominant position. As a result, they are probably prepared to continue good
relations with the Indonesian military and support them with further assistance.
Eventually they may work to establish a Communist Party that would look
to Moscow for guidance.

The Outlook

40. While many specific policies remain unclear or even undecided, the con-
duct of the Soviet leaders does suggest the way in which, in a broad sense, they
view the world and the USSR’s future in it: Their approach is increasingly
realistic. They do not act as though they belive that striking gains for Soviet
policy or Communist aspirations are available in a host of countries, They ‘do
not seize upon every crisis, near or remote, as an opportunity to advance their
cause suddenly and dramatically. This is, in our view, something more than just
a matter of style. Rather it seems to reflect a growing appreciation of the com-
plexity of the world, the unpredictability of events, and the limits on Soviet
ability to direct, or profit from, political change in foreign countries. As a
result, the USSR may be able to avoid many mistakes and to operate in a
sophisticated and effective fashion in areas where genuine opportunities exist.

41. Fundamental Soviet objectives have not been altered. They are to pre-
serve the security of the USSR, and to work toward the establishment of a
Communist world under Soviet dominatiog. Nevertheless, the approach of the

SgeRET WV
Page-15
SERET

new leaders extends and deepens the trend which dates from the Cuban missile
crisis of 1962. It contrasts sharply with the period which preceded that crisis,
when Soviet foreign policy seemed grounded on simpler conceptions and more
extravagant expectations. Perhaps the chief significance of Khrushchev’s ouster,
therefore, is that a political change of the first magnitude inside the country has
not reversed—indeed it has confirmed—the Soviet tendency to temper their
revolutionary outlook on the world with concerns of national interest and great
+ power status.
Page-16
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force :
f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
i. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

td

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a. period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

A. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of ‘State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-17
CONTR ISSEM

CONTR DISSEM