
Page-1
ros

S NIE 11-10-69
C D DISSEM 12 June 1969

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 11-10-69

Trends and Prospects in Soviet Maritime
Activities

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL

Submitted by

Arce db bn,

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf
12 June 1969

Authenticated:

5 TIVE SECRETARY, USI

  

N? 352
SEM
Page-2
The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Lt. Gen. R. E. Cushman, Jr., USMC, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State

Vice Adm. Vernon L. Lowrance, for the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

tt. Gen. Marshall $. Carter, the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. Fred J. Cassidy, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

  
  
  

nse of the United States
3, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
jorized person is prohibited.

This material contains informal
within the meaning of the espionage I
mission or revelation of whietin any manner to am
Page-3
thas document has been
approved tor release through

f the HrstoRIcaL REVIEW PROGRAN of
SEGfET the Central Intelligence Agency.

pate_J// day
me (13

 

 

CONTENTS

Page
THE PROBLEM .. ee ee eee pot teeelach eee ol, - 1
CONCLUSIONS : 1
DISCUSSION . 3
I. CURRENT POSTURE AND ACTIVITIES | . 3
A. Naval Forces Fite ae . 3
B. Merchant Marine ............ . 5
C. Fishing Fleet a ee / 7
D. Oceanographic Research and Other Special Activities . . &
E. Management and Control............ ee 9
F. Maritime Infrastructure ....°_. - 10
G. Assistance to Other Countries 10
H. Attitudes Toward Law of the Sea 11
II. OBJECTIVES OF SOVIET MARITIME PROGRAMS -
General Objectives ........... : i
Short-Term Prospects 12
Ill. LONGER RANGE POSSIBILITIES . 14
Capacity to Produce .................. 15
Prospects for the Merchant Marine .... 15
Future Role of the Navy ... 16
TABLE I: Soviet Naval Construction, 1958-1968 17

TABLE II: Yearly Deliveries of New Dry Cargo Ships and Tankers to
the Soviet Merchant Fleet ...... ar seven 1D

TABLE III: Soviet Naval Ship Deliveries to Communist Countries,
1953-1968 Fete pete eee reese. 18

TABLE IV: Soviet Naval Ship Deliveries to Non-Communist Countries,
1956-1968 2 see. ID

TABLE V: Soviet Supply of Fishing Vessels to Less Developed Countries
on Long-Term Credit 1960-January 1969 . 20
TABLE VI: Expenditures for Procurement of Ships a 2

sifeer
Page-4
afer

TRENDS AND PROSPECTS IN
SOVIET MARITIME ACTIVITIES

THE PROBLEM

To examine the nature and extent of the changes which have oc-
curred in Soviet maritime activities, military and non-military, over the
past several years; to consider what changes in policy or objectives,
if any, these activities signify; and to estimate future trends in Soviet
maritime policy and action.

CONCLUSIONS *

A. In the quest for military power, political influence, economic
strength, and status as a great power coequal with the US, the USSR
has pressed forward with a number of maritime programs and has
emerged as one of the major maritime nations.

B. Since 1945, the USSR has devoted to its navy the lion’s share
of the resources available for maritime development. The navy’s mis-
sions have been progressively extended beyond coastal defense, sup-
port of theater forces, and anti-shipping operations; in recent years
emphasis has been given to defense against US naval surface and sub-
marine forces and to strengthening the Soviet strategic strike capability.
Although the capabilities of the Soviet Navy will continue to improve
with the introduction of new classes of ships and better gear, we
believe that its missions will not change appreciably during the 1970's.

C. In recent years, the Soviets have made increasing use of naval
forces for political ends, most notably in the Mediterranean. With its
growing capabilities for long-range operations, the Soviet Navy in
the future will probably be more in evidence around the world in sup-
port of specific political objectives, as a demonstration of the USSR’s

‘For the dissenting view of Rear Adm. Frederick J. Harlfinger, II, the Assistant Chief of
Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, see the footnote on page 2 follow-
ing the Conclusions.

sgfer 1
Page-5
ffs

great power status, and as a counter to US forces. We think it unlikely,
however, that the USSR will develop any significant capability for
distant military action against substantial opposition. Nevertheless,
Soviet policy will derive considerable support from the capacity to
establish a military presence in some areas, sometimes in circumstances
which could have a deterrent effect on the will of others, including
the US, to attempt intervention.

D. The Soviet merchant marine has trebled its tonnage since 1959
and now ranks seventh among the world’s merchant fleets with four
percent of the world’s total tonnage. It will continue to expand, though
at a moderate rate because of limited Soviet shipbuilding capacity
and self-imposed restrictions on buying ships in the West. Moreover,
because most of the Soviet fleet will be needed to carry Soviet trade,
we believe that the USSR will not make serious inroads into world
seaborne trade.

E. The Soviet fishing fleet is one of the world’s largest and ranks
third in fish catch. It has been built up rapidly in recent years to satisfy
the USSR’s need for animal protein foods. We believe the size of the
fleet is probably close to the planned objective, but since their present
catch is less than stated goals, the Soviets may be expected to increase
the fishing fleet’s efficiency and to investigate new areas for exploitation.

F. The USSR has a large oceanographic fleet, comparable to that
of the US, but its research activities fall behind Western work in some
qualitative aspects. Over the past several years, much effort has been
devoted to activity related to undersea warfare and the development
of fisheries. In the future, the Soviets will in addition probably devote
increasing attention to exploring the mineral resources of the sea.

“Rear Adm. Frederick J. Harlfinger, I, Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence),
Department of the Navy, believes that the conclusions and text fail to give adequate con-
sideration to the effect that continuing nuclear deterrence and progressive Western disengage-
ment from overseas commitments are likely to have on the direction of Soviet maritime programs
over the coming decade. It is his opinion that in this situation the Soviets will see increased
opportunities for the employment of maritime power in its several forms as an instrument of
Soviet foreign policy and will shape their maritime forces to capitalize on these opportunities.
He thus anticipates that the expansion in Soviet maritime activity witnessed over the past
decade will continue at an intensity greater than that foreseen in the estimate, particularly as
related to the emerging nations and the uncommitted world.

2 sefe
Page-6
segfer

DISCUSSION
I. CURRENT POSTURE AND ACTIVITIES

1, Soviet maritime activities over the past several years have grown substan-
tially, both in volume and in geographical scope. In total tonnage, the Soviet
Navy is now second only to that of the US, and its merchant marine ranks seventh
in the world in deadweight tonnage (DWT).? Both its fishing fleet and its oceano-
graphic fleet are among the" world’s largest.

A. Naval Forces*

2, Since the end of World War II, the Soviet Navy has developed in several
fairly distinct phases. The late 1940's and early 1950's saw the resumption and
partial accomplishment of Stalin’s ambitious prewar naval construction program.
But the original plans for capital, ships and carriers, intended to be the heart
of a Soviet high seas fleet, and huge numbers of submarines, were not achieved.
The Soviets did build an impressive surface force with a nucleus of 14 Sverdlov
class cruisers, numerous coastal patrol ships and minesweepers, as well as nearly
240 W-class submarines, within 10 years. But the navy that resulted was suited
only for World War II-type operations, short-range defense of the maritime ap-
proaches to the USSR, and interdiction of merchant shipping in the northeast
Atlantic and western Pacific. With its surface units lacking air cover at sea, and
weak in anti-aircraft (AA) armament, anti-submarine warfare (ASW) sensors
and weapons, afloat logistics, and amphibious forces, this navy could not support
the USSR’s aspirations to status as a great seapower. In particular, it was in-
capable of countering Western carrier strike fleets.

3. With Khrushchev’s ascent to power in the mid-1950’s, the Soviet Navy
undertook to develop new capabilities to meet the threat posed by the carrier
strike fleets. The course adopted was to develope anti-ship cruise-missile sys-
tems for surface ships, submarines, and aircraft, and to institute long-range sur-
veillance of US aircraft carrier movements at sea. Khrushchev also fostered the
development of a strategic strike capability and nuclear propulsion of Soviet
submarines. Steps were taken to provide new shipyard capacity and capabilities.
For defense-in-depth of the USSR’s maritime approaches, coastal defense forces
seabome and ashore were also to be equipped with missile systems. By about
1960 the Soviet Navy had developed capabilities to counter the carrier strike

* Deadweight (DWT) and gross register tonnages (GRT) are standard measures of size
for non-naval ships. DWT is a measure of the weight of cargo, fuel, and stores that can be
carried, and is generally used for cargo ships and tankers, GRT is a measure of the volume
of the enclosed spaces, and is generally used for fishing and research ships.

*For a more detailed discussion of the mission, composition, and capabilities of the Soviet
Navy and its future prospects, sce the current e

ms of NIE 11-8 and NIE 11-14.
Page-7
siffer
fleets, defend the maritime approaches to the USSR, and supplement the emerg-
ing strategic strike capability of the newly-formed Soviet Strategic Rocket Troops.

4. In the early 1960's, two developments provided new impetus for Soviet naval
programs. The Cuban crisis highlighted Soviet naval inferiority, and the US
Polaris fleet began to pose an increasing threat to the USSR. Soviet naval forces
began to emphasize out-of-area operations of surface units. A high priority was
assigned to open ocean ASW, and the strategic offensive role of the Soviet sub-
marine ballistic missile force, which for a time was in doubt, was reaffirmed.

5. Prior to 1962, Soviet ballistic missile submarines were equipped with a small
number of tubes and were capable only of firing from the surface. From 1962 to
1964, emphasis was on the conversion of some of these earlier submarines for
submerged firing and on the production of cruise-missile equipped classes, By
1964, the keel of the first new 16-tube Y-class ballistic missile submarine was laid,
and the program has proceeded under an obviously high priority. Beginning in
1967, a number of new classes of other types of submarines have appeared.

6. Surface ship construction since about 1962 reflects an emphasis on multi-
purpose warships designed for long-range operations, including improvements
in ASW systems and air defenses, including SAMs. The Moskva class guided
missile helicopter ship, called an ASW cruiser by the Soviets, is one example
of this new direction. The Soviets are not building aircraft carriers, but newly
constructed or converted major surface ships have been equipped with SAMs.
There has been a small but continuing program for the construction and acquisi-
tion of landing ships, especially since the revitalization of the naval infantry in
1964, Naval auxiliary construction has emphasized submarine support ships, with
no equivalent effort on surface support ships. For surface support the Soviets
continue to rely on the merchant fleet.

7. In 1960 the Soviet Navy lost all its shore-based fighters. Since then the
range of naval air reconnaissance and strike capability has been greatly increased
by the assignment of heavy and medium bombers, many of the latter equipped
with air-to-surface missiles (ASMs). Soviet Naval Aviation also includes shore-
based fixed-wing ASW aircraft, and ship-borne or shore-based ASW helicopters.

8. As Soviet naval capabilities have grown, out-of-area operations have ex-
panded greatly both in scope and in number of ships deployed; between 1965
and 1968, the number of “ship days” out-of-area increased from about 5,500 to
17,500. The area of most notable increase has been the Mediterranean, where the
Soviet naval presence has been continuous and increasing since the introduction
of major surface combatants in 1964. The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron now
normally comprises some 30-40 units. Along with the increase in the number
and duration of deployments of individual units, the Soviets have improved the
combat capability of the force by assigning newer and more effective ships on
an almost regular basis—including nuclear-powered torpedo attack and cruise-
missile submarines, missile-equipped ASW ships, and landing ships with some

4 SEGRET
Page-8
off

naval infantry aboard. The Soviets employ naval auxiliaries and merchant ships to
support the Mediterranean Squadron, and access to shore facilities in Egypt, and
to a lesser extent Syria, has facilitated extended cruises in the area. In addition,
the stationing of Soviet reconnaissance-configured Badgers and ASW-equipped
Mail aircraft at Egyptian bases has considerably enhanced the capability of the
Squadron. In the Atlantic and Pacific, submarines have accounted for most of the
out-of-area activity; since 1962 submarine patrols have increased annually in
number, range, and duration, By contrast, deployment of surface ships in the
Atlantic and Pacific has been sporadic and limited, although last year’s operations
in the Norwegian Sea suggest’more regular, sustained operations by surface ships
in the future. In addition, recent deployments to the Indian Ocean may signal
the beginning of increased activities in that area,

9. Although the Soviet Navy has attained impressive size, the present force
has certain limitations, Only about half of the Soviet submarines have long-range
capabilities. The submarine force has a formidable anti-shipping capability, but
ballistic missile submarines comparable to Polaris and submarines with improved
ASW capabilities have only recently begun to enter service. Of about 210 major
surface combatants, about 40 have modern missile armament (SAMs and/or
SSMs) or modern ASW weapons. The small number of modem, long-range ships
will continue to limit Soviet capabilities for scme time to come. Without access
to overseas shore support facilities, any major increase in long-range operations
would require additional afloat support. This would mean oilers and cargo ships
from the merchant fleet, and perhaps naval ships designed to provide specialized
technical support, particularly maintenance and repair.

10. Geographic and climatic factors operate to limit Soviet access to the open
oceans and prevent rapid reinforcement and resupply between the four widely
dispersed fleet areas (Northern, Baltic, Black, and Pacific). The major submarine
bases are concentrated in the Northern and Pacific Fleet areas. Because of transit
distances, several submarines are required to maintain one continuously on sta-
tion off the US. Deployment of balanced forces of the type being maintained in
the Mediterranean requires support from all three western fleets. Even given the
use of Mediterranean ports, this requires considerable logistic support from the
USSR.

B. Merchant Marine

11. The Soviet merchant flect has tripled in size since 1959; about 80 percent
of the current fleet was built in the last 10 years. In mid-1968, this fleet ranked
seventh in world tonnage and consisted of about 1,200 cargo ships and tankers
totaling about 10 million DWT.‘ The Soviet fleet amounts to 4 percent of total
world tonnage and about 7 percent of total units. Of the tonnage added since

“Passenger ships, sea-river cargo ships and ships of the Caspian merchant fleet are not in-

cluded in these figures.
her 5
Page-9
seffer

1959, about one-third came from Soviet yards, 40 percent from other Commu-
nist countries, and the remainder from non-Communist countries.

 

 

 

Country Muon DWT PERCENTAGE
OF RECISTRY * AS OF 30 June 1968 oF WoRLD TOTAL

Liberia ..... - 42 16

Norway . Doleeeteedeee 30 12 7

UK cece eee cree 28 u

Japan 27 10

USA : 2. 26° 10

Greece .ill 4

USSR ......... veces 10 4

Other .2.0. 0. eee 87 _ 33

“This tabulation does not reflect the ownership of merchant ships reg-
istered under foreign flags, a phenomenon that explains the size of Liberia's
merchant fleet. US companies have more than 16 million DWT registered
under Liberian and other flags of convenience; the USSR has none. Greek
shipowners also make extensive use of foreign flags of convenience.

* Seventeen million tons active, the remainder in the aging reserve fleet.

12. Recent shipbuilding for the Soviet merchant fleet has stressed construc- |
tion of cargo ships in the 3,000 to 16,000 DWT category with speeds of less
than 20 knots. The most notable type within this group is the large-hatch ship
(i.e., with at least one hatch over 50 feet in length), of which the USSR now
has about 135. These ships also feature 60-ton capacity booms and cranes and
can transport large pieces of cargo below deck. Production of large-hatch ships |
now is being phased out. All the tankers built since 1959 have been less than '
50,000 DWT, although the Soviets say that supertankers of 80,000 to 100,000 i
DWT are in the design stage.

13. In spite of its relative newness and a 50 percent increase in average DWT
per ship since 1959, the fleet includes a high proportion of ships that are small
by current world standards. The dry cargo fleet, which accounts for 60 percent
of the tonnage, consists largely of general-purpose freighters averaging 6,500
DWT, compared with a world average of 7,900 DWT. Tankers, which account for
the remaining tonnage, average 17,000 DWT compared with a world average
of 29,000 DWT. There are no tankers over 50,000 DWT, bulk dry cargo ships
over 23,000 DWT, or container ships. Ships in these categories are becoming
increasingly common in other modern fleets, and their omission from the Soviet
fleet limits its ability to compete. The lack of such ships stems from the need to
tailor the fleet to the requirements of Soviet seaborne trade, in turn governed
by the commodity composition of the trade and by the depths and other char-
acteristics of the Soviet and foreign ports visited.

 

14. More than 90 percent of the ton-mileage of the Soviet merchant fleet is in
international trade. The fleet carries slightly more than one-half of Soviet foreign
trade cargoes, all cargoes in Soviet domestic seaborne trade, and a growing
amount of cargo for foreign shippers. Currently, Soviet merchant ships visit

6 safe

 

er
Page-10
sft:

some 800 ports in 100 countries. In 1967, 58 percent of the Soviet foreign trade
cargoes carried by Soviet ships moved between the USSR and industrial coun-
tries of the West, 26 percent moved between the USSR and other Communist
countries, and 16 percent between the Soviet Union and the less-developed
countries.

15. Because of the large amount of Soviet trade with Cuba and the long
distance between the two countries, the USSR devotes more of its merchant
ship tonnage to the Cuban trade than to trade with any other country. Although
Soviet seaborne commerce with North Vietnam is less than one million tons a
year, a considerable amount of shipping is devoted to this trade, too. The ship
tonnage required to move goods between Black Sea ports and Haiphong in-
creased by about 50 percent after closure of the Suez Canal forced all vessels
on this route to detour around the Cape of Good Hope. Virtually all Soviet
petroleum deliveries to North Vietnam now originate from Soviet Far East ports
instead of from the Black Sea. .

16. The Soviet merchant marine supports the military establishment both
directly and indirectly. Merchant ships have been used for sealift and as naval
auxiliaries. They have carried troops and military equipment in amphibious
exercises and have been used to provide logistic support for Soviet naval forces
in all fleet areas, especially the Mediterranean. The merchant fleet plays an
important role in delivering Soviet military aid cargoes, particularly to Cuba,
India, and the Middle East.

C. Fishing Fleet

17. The USSR has sharply expanded its fishing activities on the high seas since
World War II. By 1958, the Soviet fishing fleet had become one of the world’s
largest—about one million GRT. By early 1969 it had grown to 4.6 million GRT,
and it now includes some 3,800 ships. Since the late 1950's, most of the effort
to expand the fishing fleet has been devoted to construction of fish factory
trawlers. Other types of ships which have been built for the fleet are whale
factory ships, whale catchers, crab canning ships, medium trawlers, and trans-
port and processing ships. About half the Soviet fishing fleet was built in foreign
yards. Nearly all major Western shipbuilding countries, as well as Poland and
East Germany, have built fishing ships for the USSR.

18. The rapid growth of the Soviet fishing fleet has probably been due in
large part to the need for animal Protein foods. The Soviets apparently con-
cluded that increased fish production would be less expensive and quicker to
achieve than increased meat production. Fishing, sealing, and whaling now pro-
vide about 15 percent of the total animal protein consumed in the USSR and
also provide vitamins, medicines, furs, fish meal and fertilizer. The USSR has
been exporting fish products since 1959, and in 1967 exported $61 million more
than it imported. The catch in 1968 was 6.7 million tons, more than double that
of 1958. The Soviets probably now rank third in fish catch (behind Japan

and Peru).
sof: 7
Page-11
soft

19. The Soviet fishing fleet regularly operates in international waters of the
Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans as well as the Caribbean Sea and African
waters. In recent years, the activities of Soviet ships beyond their traditional
fishing waters of the North Atlantic and North Pacific have been facilitated by
agreements that the USSR has reached with 14 underdeveloped countries to
develop their fishing industries. While providing for Soviet aid in establishing
indigenous fishing fleets, ports, and canneries, these agreements also have pro-
vided facilities ashore for expanded Soviet fishing activity in nearby waters.

D. Oceanographic Research and Other Special Activities

20. The Soviet oceanographic fleet consists of an estimated 130 vessels, of
which 39 are over 1,000 GRT. Since 1966, 12 large research ships have been
built, and at least 7 more will be completed this year. Half the ships in the
oceanographic fleet are subordinate to the navy and the remainder to the
Academy of Sciences, the Hydrometeorological Services, and other civilian or-
ganizations. In addition, the Soviets regularly require other ships, including those
of the fishing fleet, to collect and report oceanographic data in the course of their
normal activities.

21. This fleet provides the Soviet Union with a large capacity in data collection
for basic research and for application in undersea warfare. However, data col-
lecting and processing instruments and equipment are, in general, less sophisti-
cated than those of the US. Sealab type research and deep-submergence vehicle
research are active but considerably behind related Western work. There also has
been some evidence of Soviet interest in exploring the mineral resources of the
sea.

22. During the past several years, the major research effort has been devoted
to activity related to undersea warfare. Much of the work has been in ocean
areas contiguous to the USSR, but as additional research vessels became avail-
able more extended surveys have been made. Areas of the South Atlantic were
examined in 1967 in conjunction with submarine support operations near the
Cape Verde Islands, and again in 1968. Surveys were begun in the Drake Passage
off South America in 1963, followed in 1966 by the transit of two nuclear sub-
marines, and two naval research ships spent five months in the area in 1968. In
the Pacific, extensive surveys have been undertaken since 1964, some at locations
that could serve as launch points for ballistic missile submarines. In the Mediter-
ranean, the Sicilian Straits and recently the Straits of Gibraltar—key submarine
transit points—have been heavily surveyed.

23. With the expansion of the Soviet missile and space programs, a requirement
arose for the provision of tracking and support facilities beyond the boundaries
of the Soviet Union. To meet these needs, the Soviets converted merchant ships
to collect data and deployed them in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. Other ships
were specially outfitted to recover spacecraft from the water. Only one such
recovery has been made—Zond 5.

8 sofler
Page-12
segfer

24. The Soviet Navy has some 40 ships specially equipped for intelligence col-
lection, which operate in this capacity on every deployment. In fact, all Soviet
naval ships are potential intelligence collectors, and some operate as such from
time to time. In addition, merchant ships and fishing vessels undoubtedly collect
and report intelligence on targets of opportunity.

25. Soviet intelligence collection ships have been active throughout the world,
particularly in areas of naval interest. They focus on US and UK submarine train-
ing areas and bases, US and NATO training exercises, US carrier operations,
troubled areas of the world,-and targets of opportunity. There are six stations
normally maintained throughout the year—one each off Holy Loch, Rota, the
US east coast, and Guam, and one each in the Gulf of Tonkin and in the Mediter-
ranean. Periodically, units operate off the US west coast, Hawaii, and in the
Yellow Sea.

E. Management and Control:

26. Each major program—naval, merchant marine, fishing—is under the juris-
diction of a separate Ministry; we do not know how coordination of the various
programs is achieved below the Council of Ministers. The Soviet Navy, subordi-
nate to the Ministry of Defense, receives the highest priority among maritime
programs. The Ministry of Shipbuilding is responsible for the design and con-
struction of ships of all types—for the Soviet Navy as well as for the maritime
and fishing fleets.

27. The merchant fleet is controlled by the Ministry of the Maritime Fleet and
is administered through a system of directorates and state steamship companies.
Each of the 15 state steamship companies owns and manages the assets of the
maritime establishment within an assigned geographical area, in accordance
with an annual cargo movement plan provided by the Ministry. Each has respon-
sibility not only for the routine operation of its fleet of ships but also for the
ship repair yards, port facilities, and maritime training schools located in its
area. Control of the fishing fleets is similar to that for the merchant marine. Over-
all responsibility rests with the Ministry of the Fishing Industry, which delegates
its responsibilities for fleet control and shore activities to the chief directorates
of each region,

28. Oceanographic research is conducted by the Navy Hydrographic Service,
the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the Main Administration of the Hydromete-
orological Service (an organization somewhat comparable to our Environmental
Science Services Administration) and the fisheries research institutes. Coordina-
tion of the program is carried out by the Scientific Council for the Utilization
of the Resources of the Sea, which is subordinate to the State Committee for
Science and Technology, and by a subcommittee of the Academy of Sciences.
The individual agencies maintain close administrative control over their own
activities and develop their own budgets.

SEgRET 9
Page-13
sfc
F. Maritime Infrastructure

29. The maritime infrastructure has expanded with the growth of the fleets. This
expansion includes shipyards, port facilities, naval bases, test facilities, afloat sup-
port ships, training facilities, and communication facilities.

30. Soviet shipbuilding programs have been reinforced by a notable expansion
of facilities and the introduction of modern shipbuilding technology. During the
period 1960-1968, the USSR invested the equivalent of more than $360 million
in four shipyards for the production and servicing of nuclear submarines. Most
of the new submarine facilities have been completed and are in use. Investment
in facilities for naval surface and merchant ships now is growing to match the
earlier Soviet effort for nuclear submarines. In the same period, the equivalent of
more than $320 million has been invested in some 35 shipyards; most of this
investment occurred after 1964. Nearly all the new production facilities for surface
ships will be completed during the early 1970's.

31. Most Soviet ports are well equipped to handle general and bulk cargo
but have not proceeded very far with facilities to handle container traffic. How-
ever, inadequate storage space, clearance facilities, and wharfage sometimes
result in long turn-around times detrimental to economical ship operations. Im-
provements would require massive capital investment and major reform of
bureaucratic deficiencies. Current capital investment is expected to alleviate but
not cure the turn-around problem.

32. Programs for research and for training personnel give some clues as to
the size and quality of Soviet maritime activity. The Ministries of Defense, Ship-
building, Maritime Fleet, and Fishing Industry all have their own research and
training facilities—some very large. For example, the ship design research insti-
tute in Leningrad is said to employ 7,000 persons; this would make it by far the
largest such institution in the world. It presently has the world’s largest ship model
basin and is constructing advanced facilities for ship research. This institute con-
ducts research on all types of warships and also on merchant and fishing ships.

G. Assistance to Other Countries

33, The Soviets have provided a variety of maritime assistance to other Com-
munist nations; they have transferred naval units, furnished technical assistance
and advisors, participated in port and naval base construction, and provided
training both in the USSR and in the various countries. The most conspicuous
assistance has been the transfer of naval units by gifts, loans, and cut-rate sales;
some 37 major combatant ships, 65 missile patrol craft, and 453 minor combatant,
auxiliary, and service craft have been delivered. (See Table ILI.)

34, The Soviet Union also furnishes maritime assistance to some 20 non-Com-
munist countries in the less developed world. (See Tables IV and V.) This aid
consists of ships, equipment, training, technical assistance, help in the develop-
ment of fishing industries, and aid in the construction and development of ports

10 SEQRET
Page-14
sigh

and harbors. Such assistance has been only a small part of the total Soviet foreign
aid program. Recipient countries often have agreed to permit Soviet use of shore
facilities in their ports—a notable advantage to Soviet vessels operating far from
facilities in the Soviet Union itself.

H. Attitudes Toward Law of the Sea

35. Coincident with their maritime growth since the mid-1950's, the Soviets
have displayed increasing awareness of the advantages of an international legal
regime for the sea. They actively participated in the Geneva Conference on Law
of the Sea in 1958, acceding with some reservations to three of the four resulting
conventions—those concerning the territorial sea and contiguous zone, the high
seas, and the continental shelf. They favor most of the provisions of the fourth
which deals with the conservation of fishery resources. On the major issue of the
width of the territorial sea, the USSR favored the 12-mile limit and led a group
of states at Geneva in preventing acceptance of the 3-mile limit. Although acced-
ing to the Geneva Convention which established the right of innocent passage
through territorial waters, the USSR did so with reservations that in effect virtually
deny the right to warships. During the past year, however, the Soviets have ac-
cepted a draft article as the basis for a new Law of the Sea Conference, which
establishes a right of free navigation through and over all international straits
for all ships and aircraft in transit through such straits, The Soviets have advanced
proposals for international controls over the deep seabed.

ll. OBJECTIVES OF SOVIET MARITIME PROGRAMS

General Objectives

36. It is apparent from the above review of the various Soviet maritime pro-
grams that the USSR has emerged as one of the major maritime nations, In
arriving at this status, its motivations have been as varied as its programs.
Aiming as they were at great power status and especially at demonstrating to
the world that the USSR and the Communist system were able to compete
successfully with the US in acquiring military power, political influence, and
economic strength, the Soviets apparently have believed it imperative to move
ahead with a variety of maritime programs.

37. But from the beginning the Soviet leaders accorded the highest priority
to the naval forces. While the emphasis in the naval program has shifted accord-
ing to their perception of the threat and their view of the feasibility of projecting
their power more distantly from the homeland, the Soviet leaders have devoted
to the navy the lion’s share of the physical and financial resources available for
maritime development. The maritime program—including the naval sector—
has not, however, been a crash program. Except for the years 1957 and 1958,
when there was a drop as a consequence of policy decisions, the expenditure
of resources on ship procurement has been fairly steady. (See Table VL) It was
not until 1968, when the impact of the Y-class submarine construction program

sof n
Page-15
aif

began to be felt, that expenditures on naval vessels may have exceeded the peaks
attained in 1955 and 1956.

38. It is also quite clear that the Soviet leaders have progressively extended
the mission of their naval forces, adapting them to the developing capabilities
of their potential enemies (principally the US) and to the evolution of the world
political situation. From an original mission of defending the Soviet shores and
supporting military operations on the Soviet periphery, they moved to develop
forces to counter the carrier task forces, then to create a seaborne strategic mis-
sile attack force, and then to acquire modern anti-submarine forces. Most re-
cently, as they progressed toward winning worldwide political acceptance, they
have begun to develop and to utilize a capability for cruising and showing the
flag in such areas as the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian and South Atlantic
Oceans.

39. The Soviets had persuasive economic reasons for expanding their merchant
marine. As their overseas trade increased, over half their seaborne cargoes came
to be carried in foreign bottoms, throwing a substantial burden on the Soviet
balance of payments. Moreover, an expanded merchant fleet to carry Soviet ex-
ports promised to increase the USSR’s hard currency earnings. There were
political and strategic inducements as well. Soviet leaders almost certainly felt
that no nation claiming great power status could do without a merchant fleet
to carry its own goods, maintain contacts with friendly powers, and service its
own forces and allies beyond its own periphery. There was also the belief that,
in a strategic sense, the USSR could not allow its expanding seaborne trade to be
at the mercy of foreign powers or shipping lines, which for political or economic
reasons might withhold their services from Soviet shippers.

40. The USSR’s motivation for the expansion of the fishing fleet was primarily
economic, and the size of the fleet is ‘probably close to the planned objective.
The Soviet government appears to recognize that some fishing grounds have been
overused, that some species need to be protected, and that some limitation and
regulation of high-seas fishing need to be established by international agree-
ment. Since stated goals are larger than their present catch, the Soviets may be
expected to increase the fishing fleet's efficiency to investigate new areas for
exploitation.

Al. Soviet objectives in oceanographic research are scientific, economic, and
military. Publicly admitted Soviet objectives in the study of the oceans include
a prognosis of currents for more efficient ship operations, improvement in fore-
casting weather, the disclosure of food, chemical, mineral, and other resources,
and the development of means for resource development.

Short-Term Prospects

42. Over the next three to five years it appears unlikely that Soviet maritime
policy will change very much from the main directions outlined above. The cur-
rent submarine program has probably not yet peaked. Aside from this, we do
not anticipate a major jump in the production of any particular kind of ship,

12 SEQRET
Page-16
segftr

though their expanded shipyard capacity gives the Soviets the capability to in-
crease production if they so choose. In any case, Soviet economic planners and
policy makers are faced with a serious problem in allocating resources; they are,
after all, trying to sustain a growing competition with the US on an economic
base half that of the US. In these circumstances, we believe that in the maritime
field the Soviets will strive to meet planned goals rather than to adopt new and
significantly higher ones.

43, In the field of merchant shipping, the Soviets have announced a goal of
13 million DWT by the end af 1970. If this goal includes vessels of the Caspian
Fleet it will probably be met. If not, the goal can only be met with a substantial
pick-up in the rate of acquisitions. In any case, the share of Soviet seaborne trade
carried in Soviet bottoms, most recently reported as 52 percent, could rise to
about 60 percent by the end of next year. During the next five years at least, the
merchant fleet will continue to be an effective instrument of Soviet trade and aid
programs.

44, In the naval field, the emphasis during the next five years or so also seems
likely to follow the lines now indicated: the production of the Y-class ballistic
missile submarine and the development of an improved ASW capability, utilizing
new types of aircraft, surface ships, and submarines. Considering the probable
Y-class construction capacity, the USSR could, and probably will, develop a bal-
listic missile submarine force during the next five years roughly comparable to
the current US Polaris force. An effective anti-submarine force, especially against
nuclear submarines, poses most formidable technical and operational problems
for the Soviets,

45. There seems little doubt that out-of-area operations will increase over at
least the next five years. When the Y-class becomes operational in greater num-
bers, out-of-area deployments of ballistic missile submarines will almost certainly
become more extensive and regular. To extend the area of submarine patrol
activity and to increase the number maintained on station, the Soviets could use
afloat logistic support; they experimented with his concept in 1967 in the mid-
Atlantic. They will probably attempt surveillance of Polaris Operating areas and
increase that of US naval forces cruising in waters near the USSR, including the
Mediterranean. They will conduct show-the-flag cruises with increasing fre-
quency. However, any major increase in the capability of Soviet surface forces
to conduct.sustained long-range operations would require access to foreign shore
support facilities, augmentation of naval auxiliary forces, or an increase in sup-
port from the merchant fleet.

46. Out-of-area operations for primarily political reasons almost certainly
will continue and perhaps extend beyond those already apparent; for example,
to the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf. How much larger and more active
the Mediterranean Squadron becomes will depend a good deal on the course of
events in the Middle East; barring an unlikely deterioration of the Soviet posi-
tion in that area we would expect the capability of the force gradually to increase.
It is not necessary to assume that the Soviets expect to drive the US Navy out of

ssf 13
Page-17
wf

the Mediterranean, and there are obvious dangers for them in risking too much
on the potentially precarious line of communication through the Turkish Straits.
The primary Soviet purpose is to achieve the political and psychological advan-
tages of a naval presence and to deny exclusive domination to the US and its
allies. And, if war came, the Soviets could at least pose a challenge to US
naval power.

47. Projected improvements in Soviet sealift capabilities over the next several
years will also give the Soviets a greater capability for military intervention in
situations where there is little risk of conflict with a major power. Amphibious
assault lift will continue to increase. The merchant fleet could augment this lift
by transporting substantial quantities of military equipment and supplies, but
in most cases this would require the use of ports. Considerable time might be
required to gather suitable merchant shipping for a major effort, since about 45
percent of active Soviet merchant ships are normally outside Communist waters.
In general, we believe the Soviet leaders would be very cautious about com-
mitting themselves to military operations very far from Soviet territory, especially
in view of their lack of carriers and advanced bases, but it is possible that in
some conceivable situations—as for example in some area where US interests
were negligible—they might feel that they could use their limited capability
to support a political leader or nation with whom they had close ties.

48. We do not foresee any radical changes in Soviet naval assistance programs.
The recipients for the most part have been in developing areas where the So-
viets have sought to displace Western influence and to create a climate conducive
to the growth of Communist influence. Except in the UAR and Indonesia, the
emphasis has been on providing coastal defense rather than large combatant
units. We expect that the emphasis on coastal defense will continue, but with
a gradual trend toward providing more modern ships and weapons together with
the necessary training and technical assistance. Despite the negative results in
Indonesia, Moscow still appears willing to give naval assistance where suitable
opportunities appear. One such opportunity may now exist in India, which ap-
parently is seeking to strengthen its naval forces and has already purchased
some ships from the USSR. Pakistan, too, appears likely to seek Soviet naval as-
sistance. While the geographic scope of this assistance is likely to grow, we do
not envisage any appreciable increase in these programs—barring, of course, a
crisis similar to the Arab-Israeli war of 1967.

lll. LONGER RANGE POSSIBILITIES

49. The Soviet leaders have probably not made detailed program decisions
beyond the next four or five years. Lead-times in most cases do not require them
to do so; uncertainty over technological progress—both in the USSR and the
US—inhibits decisions on costly programs; and the current economic difficulties
and possible political infighting in Moscow do not seem conducive to major
departures from present patterns. Nevertheless, there are a number of questions

14 suff
Page-18
segfer

which may arise as the Soviet planners consider the impact of changing require-
ments on their maritime establishment.

Capacity to Produce

50. Since 1960, an annual average of about 250,000 GRT of dry cargo ships
and tankers has been built in Soviet yards, as well as 142,000 tons FLD > of
naval ships, If the Soviets should decide to do so, and it would be a major policy
change, ship construction could be substantially increased by making the requisite
inputs of materials and skilled,labor and the necessary adjustments in manage-
ment. However, we see no indications that these measures are being undertaken.
Nor do we find evidence of increased naval construction at the expense of mer-
chant construction, or vice versa. We are unlikely to acquire early notice of a
Soviet decision to make such trade-offs, but we see no reason for them to occur
on a large scale.

51. A major increase in Soviet shipbuilding capacity could also be achieved
by the construction of new yards. However, we see no evidence that @ program
of any magnitude is in the offing. In any case, because of the time required to
construct shipyards, such a program would have to begin in the very near future
to have a significant impact on production capabilities in the next 10 years or so.

52. We believe that over the next decade the rate of domestic ship production
will increase moderately. The increases will probably result from expansion and
modernization of existing yards.

Prospects for the Merchant Marine

53. In recent years, Soviet seaborne foreign trade has been increasing at an
average rate of some 9 percent annually. This rate is unlikely to be sustained,
but the trade will probably continue to grow at a rate only slightly less than the
growth of the Soviet merchant fleet. In this case, much of the planned growth
in merchant shipping must be devoted to carrying Soviet cargoes, and relatively
little additional capacity will be available to compete for Western trade. To make
serious inroads into the non-Soviet shipping trade, the Soviets would have to
acquire substantially more shipping than the 22-23 million DWT goal announced
for 1980.

54. We expect that the rate of additions to the Soviet merchant fleet will not
increase significantly. As noted above, we believe that domestic production will
not show a notable increase. Purchases from Western countries are constrained
by hard currency requirements. And 80 percent of the output of East European
yards is already going to the Soviets. All things considered, most future foreign
acquisition will probably be from Eastern Europe, Yugoslavia, and Finland,
where hard currency is not involved in payments.

55. We believe that for the next decade the Soviet merchant fleet will remain
a carrier of Soviet cargoes and will not attempt to gain a major slice of world

* Full load displacement.
Page-19
fo

seaborne trade, even though it will probably acquire some container ships and
supertankers. Even if the Soviet merchant marine attains the goal of 22-23 million
DWT by 1980, this will still be less than 10 percent of today’s total world ton-
nage, a percentage already achieved by five other nations, However, their fleet
will continue to compete on some routes.

Future Role of the Navy

56. The USSR is a continental power with interior lines of communication,
and is largely self-sufficient. However, its goals and a growing realization of the
implications of sea power have led it over the past few years to strengthen and
modernize its naval forces and to extend the naval missions. We believe that
Soviet capabilities for the performance of naval missions will continue to grow
but that there will be no appreciable change in the extent and character of these
missions.

57. Beyond this, however, the Soviets probably foresee politico-military situa-
tions wherein the navy can assist state interests without inviting large-scale
conflict. In such situations, a small Soviet naval presence could exert an influ-
ence far beyond that warranted by its intrinsic military capabilities. We thus
expect an increasing Soviet presence in various ports and harbors of the Third
World. Soviet policy will also derive considerable support from the capacity
to establish a military presence in some areas, sometimes in circumstances which
could have a deterrent effect on the will of others, including the US, to attempt
intervention.

58. A Soviet decision to develop significant naval capabilities for sustained,
long-range operations against substantial opposition would represent a major
change in the role of the Soviet Navy and would cause great changes in its
composition. It would involve the addition of substantial forces to provide logistic
and combat support, particularly air cover; it would confront Moscow with a
wholly new spectrum of military and technical problems; it would be very ex-
pensive. Moreover, in some cases the Soviets might calculate that the use of
such forces to achieve political objectives could entail liabilities that might out-
weigh the advantages. Finally, they would probably reckon that the deployment
of such forces would represent a direct challenge to the US and would greatly
increase the risk of a direct confrontation, something that they have heretofore
sought to avoid. For these reasons, we think it unlikely that the Soviets will
develop any significant capability for distant military action against substan-
tial opposition during the 1970's.

16 : seffx
Page-20
TABLE I

SOVIET NAVAL CONSTRUCTION *

  

 

1958-1968

Yean . Supnanine* Toran®
1958 2.2... : 15,000 74,500
1959 . : 48,500 146,000
1960.11.22. aoe 58,000 146,500
1961 . 73,500 149,500
1962 . : : . 49,500 131,500
1963 ...... a . 44,000 123,000
1964 ........ . 52,000 119,000
1965 2.0.2.2... 7 .. 44,000 115,000
1966 tendae . 38,000 144,000
1967 . 40,000 178,000
1968 ..... Pye eed. 62,500 174,500

TOTAL .... 525,000 1,501,500

 

* All figurs are rounded off to the nearest 500 tons.

* Tonnage figures represent full load displacement (FLD) with ships fully
equipped, manned and fueled (submarines in a surfaced condition).

TABLE I

YEARLY DELIVERIES OF NEW DRY CARGO SHIPS
AND TANKERS TO THE SOVIET MERCHANT FLEET *

 

MiLui0on MILLION
YEAR DWT Year DWT
1959 .. : wo O4 1964 12
1960 2.0.22... vee. 0.6 1965 11
1961 oe 05 1966 10
1962 08 1967 08
1963 0.8 1968 08

 

 

“Including only vessels of 1,000 or more GRT delivered to the Ministry
of the Maritime Fleet; excluding ships of the Caspian Steamship Company
and river vessels of the Danube Steamship Company.

SEQRET

17
Page-21
SE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE UL
SOVIFT NAVAL SHIP DELIVERIES TO COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
1953-1968
COMMUNIST EAST NORTH NORTH YUGO-
ALBANIA RULGARIA CHINA CUBA GERMANY KOREA VIETNAM POLAND RUMANIA SLAVIA TOTAL
Submarines. 4 5 8 4 4 25
Destroyers. + 4 7 2 6
Escorts....... 2 4 6
Missile Patrol
Boats....... 18 12 i 12 5 7 65.
Motor Torpedo

Boats....... 6 8 76 24 27 20 12 19 13 205
Coastal Es- 5
corts.. . 6 8 6 18 12 6 4 4 4 68
Patrol........ . . 1 20 2 7 5 39
Mine Warfare. 8 7 2 7 27 20 64
Auxiliary...... 0 4 1 7 1 : 7 6
Amphibious... .. . : 3 5 8
Service........ 14 23 . 16 53
TOTAL..... 53 53 97 79 87. 88 23 41 42 12545

18 SEQGRET
Page-22
ET

 

 

"91938q Jo Jopso UY papnyoUT you syuM voyod pus fouyed ops0q sapnyoUy q
“s}Jun wsopour oJour 10} poBuvyoxo soupreuigns oAy puL sioSossep om} sopnfoUy ¥

 

 

 

 

  
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

oe F~«CSTSCOC«‘SC*“<C«i OSC“ e wz eit or 8 ¥ @ 9 oT LOL

SF ¥ ut ; . oer 7 171+ “q snovuspoosyyy

of z o¢ z z ¢ ” a Boo soppaaag

ww og ~ 1% aa aan Too daerny

6% ar € 8 a 7 9 “yax0osg [818809

i 9 er ¢ 1 lel | ' Sees ceettorgeg

st 8 : z ; aia : ole 7 Zc erapey ou

8% zo z ¢ 9 z : 7 vse snorqiydury

68 oe gig ater : aS og ao syeog ee

opadioy, s0,0W

7 oc 9 . ; Coley : . . an Bo ele go
oye opssry |=

at . aa z a 7 Sep eee et seacnect

ot - ; a; . . . ees te ares saadonnsegq

7 loro . . en ve esses sgaupagng

1 . 5 ae . — Heese senesguaaqnug

 

 

WVl0L NaWSA VIN VIWAS VIIVWOS VRIGDIN bYaT VISUN VIGNI VaNIND VNVHD GNVI Snudio Vivgorv

VZNVL -OaNT “NIE

 

8961-9961
SAMLNNOO LSINANIVOO-NON OL SARINAITAG dIHS TVAYN LOIAOS

AI ATAVL
Page-23
TABLE V

SOVIET SUPPLY OF FISHING VESSELS TO LESS
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES ON
LONG-TERM CREDIT, 1960-JANUARY 1969

 

   

 

 

 

NUMBER PROVIDED = VALUE OF NUMBER KNOWN,

Counrry FOR UNDER AGREEMENT _ CREDIT DELIVERED
Algeria. . . .
Ghana $3.6 18
Guinea | $3.5" 4
Senegal .. $3.6 .
Indonesia 1
Ceylon. 1
Pakistan. $1.6
UAR ... $3.5° a
Yemen ........ $2.0° :

TOTALS ...... $17.8 4

* NA—number not available.

» Estimated.

 

20 coffe
Page-24
sha:
USSR: EXPENDITURES FOR PROCUREMENT OF SHIPS
1950-1968

TOTAL PROCUREMENT

Table VI

        
 
 

BILLION
1966 2.0
DOLLARS ' 4.5

 

 

 

RESEARCH SHIPS (Note Change in Scale)

a
1950 51

52 53 54 55 56 5ST 58 59 G0 G1 62 63 64 65 66 61 68

95239 6.69 CIA 1/ Dollar values reflect estimated ship procurement expenditures as if purchased in the US.

They thus do not necessarily represent actual or real costs to the USSR.

21
SEQRET
Page-25
sfx
Page-26
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the follow-
ing officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force .

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Director of Central Reference Service, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Central Reference Service, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

cient

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Page-27
PRET
OLLED DISSEM
3
é